---
title: SLP442 Joe Burnett Bitcoin Long Term Security and why ETH is doomed
transcript_by: Biee-Coffee via TBTBTC v1.0.0
media: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=youtube.com/watch?v=EcFbDC9Jzuo
tags: ['‘security’']
speakers: ['stephan livera', 'Joe Burnett']
categories: ['podcast']
date: 2023-02-01

---

##  Introduction

 Joe, it's been a while. Welcome back to the show. Thanks, Tefy. I'm good to be on. So, Joe, I've seen you've been doing some great work. Recently, I know you're over at Blockware now. And you had a really interesting thread that I wanted to chat about and get some of those insights out there in audio format. Just some of my listeners, I'm sure they'll be interested to hear your thoughts on why. Basically, Ethereum has various long-term security issues. Well, at the same time, Bitcoin is actually, we could argue, is safe in the longer term. And so, this is a big point of discussion. So, we'll have to break some of this down for everybody. But do you want to just start with a bit of a high level about why you wrote that thread? Yeah, definitely. So, before this thread, Pierre Ashard and I, whose VP of research at Riot Blockchain, we wrote a report about how Bitcoin's security in the long term, as many ETH talking heads recently have been tweeting about. They say that, you know, Bitcoin's security is not okay after the block subsidy ends. And so, we wrote a report that kind of rebuttled that idea. And the general thesis behind my ETH thread specifically was going into, okay, you know, now that we've rebuttled why Bitcoin's long term, quote unquote, security, and our mind, it's more about transaction finality is fine. In reality, it's actually ETH that has a security problem and related to that, a value accrual problem. Like, how does the ETH token actually obtain and retain its value? And so, I kind of came up with a short thread that analyzed, okay, what are the security problems with ETH and how can we attempt to value ETH? And what are the problems with trying to value ETH today? Gotcha. Yeah. And actually, you know what, I think it would be a good idea to chat a little bit about the Bitcoin security side of it first. I think that is a common area of, I think, attack, or people just say this line without really thinking it's through, right? So, let's just spell out the basics for listeners who are new, right? So, Bitcoin's blocks, so on average there's a new block every 10 minutes that has a bunch of transactions in that. The reward that the Bitcoin miners receive is actually made up of two parts. There's the transaction fees, and then there is the block subsidy, right? That's the 21 million coins being issued out over time. Whereas the transaction fees relate to, let's say, Joe sends me a transaction, or I send Joe a transaction, I attach a little bit of fee to my transaction to incentivize the miners to include my transaction into their block. And so, this whole argument, I'm just spelling out the basics. So, the basic argument goes, oh, look, the subsidy is decreasing over time because, as most people know, Bitcoin's block halving or the halving happens roughly every four years where that subsidy halves. And so, can you just spell out kind of the high level argument that is made there about, oh no, why is that not going to be enough? Well, why is that a problem? Yeah, definitely. Yeah, it's interesting because we see this in the no-coiner camp and the Bitcoiner camp where there's kind of two narratives, right? When fees are high, when transaction fees are high for the network, you know, the people that may not like Bitcoin or don't see Bitcoin as viable will say, hey, Bitcoin can't scale. But then when transaction fees are low, the same people are saying actually, you know, Bitcoin doesn't have long-term security. And so, they're kind of painting the narrative to match whatever the current environment is. And to be honest, we kind of see this somewhat in the Bitcoin community as well. We see when fees are high, people say, and the Bitcoin community may be like, hey, security is totally fine and long run. And then when fees are low, people in the Bitcoin community might be like, hey, Bitcoin is scaling. So people on both sides of the argument are like constantly trying to like make their side seem great depending on whatever the environment is. But the gist.

##    Bitcoin long term security arguments

 The general thesis behind this report is it's not necessarily about Bitcoin security when the block subsidy ends It's more about transaction finality and so in our the report that we put out with blockware and riot We came to the idea that hey Bitcoin security is more about private key storage and Bitcoin's consensus rules are more about being able to operate and run your own node Whereas receiving or sending a Bitcoin transaction and miners building these digital walls of energy around those Transactions that's more about transaction finality and as more walls are more blocks get built around your Transaction then that increases the confidence and the finality in the transaction that you sent and so the general ideas is Hey, it's not that miners provide security for Bitcoin. It's that miners introduce you know a level of transaction finality and over time as more blocks come in that Transaction finality becomes more you know Confident and more final gotcha. Yeah, so let me just replay that again Just to make sure new listen is a following along the basic idea here as you and Pia Argue is this idea that it's not so much about more hash power

##  Finality, not security

 equals more security, it's more like we should think of that more about as finality. So generally in Bitcoin, as we say, don't take transactions on the basis of zero confirmations that we should wait for one confirmation. Now, there's a separate debate going on about in the RBF world about Ken people, can certain merchants manage a zero confirmation risk that's kind of bit refill and John Cavallo and other people are making that kind of case. But here we're talking about this idea and it is related, this idea that in Bitcoin, things can be reorganized. However, the basic idea is the more confirmations, the more blocks there are, the harder it is to reorganize. And so in that sense, what we're talking about with Bitcoin miners finding, you know, trying to find a find that a new block, they are basically creating it, they are sort of creating a continual wall or additional finality that every new confirmation that is added, every new block that is attached to the Bitcoin blockchain. Yep, yeah, exactly. And there's basically two ways that we outlined in the report that users can mitigate attacks. So right now, for example, people deem most Bitcoin transactions perfectly settled within six confirmations, whether you're sending $10 or you're sending a billion dollars, you know, if you deposit on Coinbase, they're going to be like, hey, it's six confirmations, no one even really worries about it. So a lot of this report is is also talking about the idea that, hey, this is kind of like a theoretical problem that doesn't really exist currently, but potentially could exist in the future. But in the report, we talk about two ways that users can mitigate attacks if they're worried about their finality of the transaction. One, and we've seen this in reality with other less, change with less hash power, like Bcash, we can wait for more confirmations. So like, right, I said, a Bitcoin deposit, typically is deemed final after six confirmations with Bitcoin cash that a typical deposit at Coinbase crack and our finance might be deemed a final after 15 or 100 confirmations. And this is still both of those are less than 24 hours, which is not a big deal for global trust list final settlement. And so that's something that, you know, can happen over time if, you know, Bitcoin's hash rate drops or people are simply worried about the finality of their transaction, they can just wait for more confirmations. The second way to mitigate attacks is is increasing transaction fees, right? So if there is a active, you know, group of miners that are 51% of attacking the network, remember, they can't change Bitcoin consensus rules. They can't necessarily take your private keys, but they can censor transactions. That's effectively what all attacks stem from. So if miners are, you know, for example, doing an empty block attack and just mining empty blocks, this could be a state level actor that doesn't want anyone to transact on Bitcoin, all that would happen in that scenario is people would be bidding their transaction fees in the mimple to try to get included in the next block. And we've seen like what happens when the mimple gets clogged or when there's not enough block space to fill all of the transactions in the mimple, miners or transactions could go from, you know, per block transaction fees could go from zero Bitcoin to 10 plus Bitcoin really fast as we saw in 2017, you know, during the peak when there was a lot of demand for Bitcoin block space, but there wasn't necessarily much supply for block space. So if there's active censorship on the network, the natural market based response in the mimple is simply increasing transaction fees. And that's kind of the response and the way that Bitcoin naturally would mitigate against any sort of censorship attack. Right. And just to spell that out, part of the idea there is the increased transaction fee increases the incentive for, let's call it an honest miner to pick up that transaction that let's say the, let's say the dishonest miner or the government attack or someone attacking the network is let's say that person is trying to deo s that network, denial of service. And so they are trying to do what you said, the empty block attacks are they're just trying to do, and it's like not an economic attack. They're not going to make money by doing this. In fact, they are losing money to attempt this. But the point being, they may have a certain quantity of hash power and they are trying to have enough hash power to just consistently deny and basically stop other people from using the network. But as he said, one of the countermeasures is that you people would increase their transaction fee. And so then even though that malicious actor is trying to do empty blocks and block the network from proceeding or at least meaningfully proceeding, there are the honest miners who do want fees and they're just obviously motivated to earn fees. So the higher the transaction fees are going, the more they're inclined to include or anyone is inclined to try to include that transaction in a block. And as an example, there may be even people who see, oh wow, look, there's so much there's so many people putting in high fee transactions. It might now actually start to make more mining machines profitable that were previously unprofitable. So that's that's part of how the dynamic there works. Exactly. And another interesting point that we found like researching this topic is at the time that we published this Bitcoin caches block reward, total block reward was 5x less than average Bitcoin transaction fees per block and dollar terms. And so even though that Bitcoin transaction fees are already providing much more reward to finalize and build these blocks on Bitcoin, Bitcoin cash is still traded on Coinbase, crack and finance. And they simply only require marginally more confirmations. And like I said, it's 15 or 100 confirmations, which is still rapid settlement without a trusted third party. And so that kind of gives hope that, hey, like even if Bitcoin transaction fees don't rise significantly from where they are today, we're already seeing other networks being able to do trustless final settlement without having to worry too much about 51% attacks or double spins. Another topic that fear and I have been talking about recently is, you know, all of your other assets that you hold even in the fiat world, whether it's US treasuries, your equities, your real estate, basically what's the walls around those transactions of you acquiring those assets is basically just a legal system. And that's about it. In a way, the Bitcoin network still has like a legal system potentially, like that's one layer of security around Bitcoin transactions. Like if Michael Saylor buys a billion dollars worth of Teslas from Elon Musk and he sends the Bitcoin and then Michael Saylor double spins on Elon Musk. Well, in the real world, he's still going to owe Elon Musk a billion dollars worth of Bitcoin, right? So Bitcoin not only has the legal system that may exist protecting the transactions, but it also has these digital walls of energy that add a second layer of security around Bitcoin transactions. Whereas all of your other assets, real estate, US treasuries, equities, bonds, there's no digital wall of energy protecting those assets. It's just whether the government says you do have it or you don't have it. Right. And so that's, yeah, I think that's a great way to put it. And fundamentally, what we're talking about here is that Bitcoin is the system that exists outside of the government. And so it's a monetary system outside the government control. And I think the key, I think some of the key lessons that we've been talking about so far, one of those is this idea that it's the nodes that really protects the overall validity of transactions, right? Because, yes, Bitcoin miners are involved in the ordering of transactions, but actually it's Bitcoin nodes that say whether it's valid or not. And so that's the really crucial part because when, you know, and I think sometimes people take this a little bit too far there, you know, individuals out there who try to make this idea of like, oh, it's going to be like a war gaming scenario and you need Bitcoin mining. Well, no, it's the nodes that are deciding, is this a valid transaction or is it not? Right. So is it signed by the private key associated for this, you know, address or for this public key or multi-sig, you know, whatever, whatever conditions are, is it a valid signature? Yes or no? And that's it. And then yes or no, it's a valid transaction or yes or no, it's a valid block or it's not a valid block. And that's just what it is. So it's the nodes that really protect the actual security of the network. And as we talk about in Bitcoin, the idea is that it should be accessible for people, idealists cheap for people to run a Bitcoin node. You can do it with, you know, your existing laptop or computer or buy a $300, you know, laptop or old PC and you can run Bitcoin node on that. So that, I think those are probably the key points. One other area that I really wanted to touch on is this flywheel. So I see this in the report as well, where there's this interesting flywheel and I thought it'd be fascinating to talk about this idea that we start out, you know, let's say there's a demand for cheaper settlement, then, you know, the fees go down because of that new technology, whether it's lightning or batching or and so on, then we get adoption and then the fees come up. And then we sort of, it's like it's just a round and round and round. If you could just explain and elaborate a little bit on that idea.

##  Bitcoin’s scaling cycle

 Yeah, this is something that we titled in the report, the Bitcoin scaling cycle. We've seen this play out throughout the history of Bitcoin, where, hey, there's Bitcoin is increasing in scarcity, there's a having, there's another wave of adoption, the price is going up, there's more demand to demand final settlement of actual Bitcoin because people want to acquire Bitcoin's for long-term savings. Because of this, there's a fixed amount of block space, like we said, we want to keep block space fixed because that's what enables everyone to run a full node and keep the network accessible and verifiable from an individual perspective. So the global consensus rules of Bitcoin don't change. So there's a fixed amount of block space, but there's potentially lots of increasing demand for final settlement of Bitcoin when that happens transaction fees go up. So that's one reason that transaction fees can go up if there's scaling issues on the base layer of Bitcoin. When transaction fees go up, what we see happen is people demand cheaper settlement, right? And so we've seen this play out, we've seen exchanges batching transactions, we've seen the lightning network development, we've seen Fediment, we've seen liquid, we've seen root stock, different Bitcoin sidechains. And so when transaction fees go up, we see demand for cheaper final settlement, that encourages people and developers and companies to build out various scaling solutions on top of Bitcoin. And then people can put, theoretically put more throughput through the same amount of fixed block space and then fees eventually go back down and then Bitcoin is scaling properly. And then we later see another wave of Bitcoin adoption where maybe there's 10 X more people demanding final settlement on Bitcoin and the fees go back up again. And then we see, okay, now we have another layer, or another period of increase, demand for cheaper settlement because fees went back up. And then now lightning network gets more developed or liquid gets more developed or a fitting man or whatever. And so we've seen this play out through 2017, we saw lightning really get created, mostly after that, it really get developed mostly after that, liquid exchanges started batching transactions, segue it as well. So people started to do these different technology, like scaling solutions and that helps Bitcoin scale and lead to more final settlement. Yeah, it's a fascinating scaling wheel or adoption cycle. And I think it is true to say that in 2017, there was a lot of, the fees were rising in it. At that point there were a lot of people complaining about the fees, I think at that point at the peak, I think people were paying something like $30 or $50 a transaction and so people were saying, oh, how can this be? And then a lot of people were basically yelling at exchanges, hey, get segue it, when segue it. And so segue it and then the addition of exchange batching. So the idea is let's say I'm in exchange and I'm paying out to the customers who want to withdraw. Instead of me just doing one transaction per customer, I just do one transaction, but actually there's 50 outputs. So it's one transaction going out to 50 people. And so that batching massively saved on the block space. So as we said, blocks happen on average 10 minutes. And a typical block, if you look on mempled.space you can see the blocks go by, but on average we're talking 2000 transactions, maybe 3000 per block in an average. And so I think those techniques segue it and batching are probably most to thank. And so now basically the major exchanges support segue it and pretty much all the exchanges do batching. And we saw a very big drop in the memple or at least in the block space market or the fee market when, for example, blocktrain.info turned on segue it and started doing batching as well. Yeah, exactly. So basically the key idea is transaction fees on the Bitcoin network can be high for one of two reasons. One, there's a lack of scaling technology which over time can get resolved with more scaling technologies. And then two, active censorship from a select group of miners. And two, the reason the response to if their censorship fees go up and that's just a natural response. Honest miners come back online or the attacker says, hey, instead of attacking Bitcoin and not making any money, I should actually just honest mind these transaction fees and defect and play the game because the incentives actually work. Yeah, that's fascinating. And I think I, for a while, speculate.

##  Bull and bear markets of bitcoin are a feature, Why ETH is more or less doomed

 Oh, we're going to see more lightning when we see another bull rung. Like this is years ago, right? I thought, Oh, we'll see more lightning when there's like a big bull rung and transaction fees spike again. And that will be the impetus just like with segwit, like this time around, that will be the thing for lightning. Now, it didn't quite happen that way. I think it's probably more fair to say the large exchanges turning on segwit and batching were enough to bring fees down to where they are today. We're oftentimes it will clear, but I think longer term, we're going to have the opposite problem, right? Like we're going to have a lot of people who want to transact because they want to open a lightning channel or they want to do some kind of transaction using Bitcoin, whereas today they are very much not doing that. And of course, we have our skate. We have a lot of the scaling stuff that's we're laying. We're laying the roads. We're laying down the piping. Right? We have lightning. We have people like Galois and Bitcoin beach wallet where, you know, they've got tens of thousands of people on that wallet who are using lightning day to day. You know, there are big exchanges who have enabled lightning. So whether that's cash app, crackin, bits, the next, you know, so many. So it's interesting to see where that's going. And I think the other really interesting thing I saw and I picked this up from your report where you point out that there are 32 million entity according to glass node data, there are 32 million entities or estimated, there's store wealth on the Bitcoin blockchain, but almost all of them are using it as store value and not medium of exchange or method of payment or whatever we want to call it. And then so then what happens when we go to seven billion? Well, that's going to be a 200 X over 200 X increase in entities competing for that block space. So if I think if there's any kind of suggestion that I'll see the fees are not going to be enough, it's insane to think that when I think if anything, the problem is going to be the other way around. Yeah, definitely exactly. So it also kind of plays into the idea of where we're at in Bitcoin is adoption cycle kind of like you're saying right now. People are adopting Bitcoin as more of this collectible slash store value because it's very volatile and its adoption is growing extremely rapidly. But in the long run, if more users do adopt Bitcoin as a store value, it effectively would also become, you know, the default best form of medium of exchange that you used to actually trade Bitcoin for goods and services. And if, you know, not only does the amount of users go up in that scenario by a significant amount, but the amount of transactions those users are making also goes up by a significant amount. So if Bitcoin transactions per user were about, you know, one to five per day and we had about seven, eight billion people using Bitcoin, that's about a 80,000 X increase in transaction throughput that needs to occur on the Bitcoin blockchain. And obviously it'll be for that to happen. We would definitely need to be using second layer scaling solutions. But certainly I definitely agree that the problem most likely in the future will be fees will be high and will be trying to build out more and more scaling solutions as those fees become or they ended up pushing people to, you know, lightning or liquid or even third layer solutions. Right. Yeah. And I think that maybe that's one of the, let's say, dangers or whatever in the longer term is that, you know, a lot of people end up being custodial without the ability to be self custodial. But I think I'm still bullish on where things are going. I believe there will be new technology coming and we just haven't had the impetus yet for some of those things. And I think once we get some of these ideas like let's as an example, let's say in the future if we got any pro valve and then we get channel factories or L2 that enables L2, which then enables multi party channels. And so maybe that is going to be part of the future scaling model because, you know, it's just going to be difficult for everyone wants to have a lightning channel on chain because just today it's not kind of scale to the world. At least non custodial or self custodial. But I mean, I still think the point for me is that it's possible for people to self custody right now. I understand there'll be people who are custodial. But I think that's probably how I'm seeing it in the in the longer term. And then you also had some estimates in terms of where you think things are going because again, part of this whole argument it's a long term arguments of the argument the way it's made people say, you know, people say, oh look, there won't be enough fees or whatever for the miners to keep the things secure right because they use this term the security budget right, which as we've already mentioned it's more about validity, not security. But the argument is the argument goes that all maybe by around 2035 or 2040 around there that there won't be enough fees. And so in the report you sort of spell out what you think is a likely scenario where you say likely the fees are going to outpace the subsidy between 2032 and 2048. Yeah, exactly. And I think the general idea of just adding on to the idea of a security budget. We kind of think that's kind of like a weird term and kind of the totally wrong way to look at it because we think that the security budget or the counter attack to an attack is higher fees. So theoretically if someone is attacking the network or a miner is attacking the network or tracking transaction finality or effectively censoring transactions, the response is higher fee. So the budget can be however high, you know, people are willing to pay for transaction fees, which could be very high because Bitcoin is the most or the least uncertain asset because of the ability to run your own node like we talked about. So yeah, we think that by 2032 to 2048, you know, Bitcoin transaction fees and aggregate will likely surpass on average per block the block subsidy and then at that point, you know, it's kind of up to the, I guess the ties will be the, I guess the ties will change where people won't be attacking Bitcoin's long term security. They won't be much of an argument at that point as long as, you know, Bitcoin is still working and, and at that point and people still deem it, you know, the least uncertain monetary technology that humans have ever discovered. Yeah, and so let's go into that a little bit. So for people who are newer to Bitcoin, why is Bitcoin the least uncertain monetary technology? Yeah, definitely. So Bitcoin is, you know, an open and accessible network like anyone can join and anyone can run a Bitcoin full note, right? And anyone can hold their own Bitcoin private keys. And because anyone can do that, Bitcoin has these unique monetary properties that are immutable. So Bitcoin as a meetable scarcity, it's portable, it's durable, it's divisible, it's fungible. And because of these unique monetary properties, we know with, with the highest degree of certainty that, hey, this is what Bitcoin is today, no one can change it, no group of, of no government can change it, no group of developers can even change it. All of these properties are set in stone and immutable. And that's what makes Bitcoin the least uncertain monetary technology. If you compare it to, I'm sure we'll probably get into this something like ETH, the future supply of ETH is extremely uncertain. In fact, the future supply of ETH is literally determined by how many Ponzi's and dog tokens are being traded or minted at any given point in time. The future supply of ETH is extremely uncertain as far as even in the market, but also we have a, the Ethereum foundation which can make, you know, consensus altering changes to Ethereum and completely change the monetary supply schedule. So something like Ethereum is very uncertain, something like gold is even relatively uncertain. And more certain than almost all other monetary technologies is that for Bitcoin, but theoretically, you know, we could find a massive sum of gold at the bottom of the ocean when new technology is created to mine gold. And so you're kind of, with gold, you're kind of relying on nature and you're kind of short technology. With Ethereum, you're kind of relying on the Ethereum foundation and not change things and people to, you know, mint dog tokens and Ponzi coins. But with Bitcoin, there's not a specific central group that can change Bitcoin's monetary properties and that's what makes Bitcoin so special. Yeah, that's a great explanation. And I think it really is important to, to hammer that point that there's a recent whole Bitcoin because we believe it's going to be money. So if you're coming from an Austrian way of thinking about money, you're thinking, what is the most saleable, good? What's the most saleable commodity? That's the one that's most likely to be money and that's where we get into all this stuff right. The scarcity, the divisibility, the durability, the portability, the, you know, all of these aspects, the verifiability, all of these things help us reduce our future uncertainty. Because again, that's another point. Like why do we even hold money? It's because we're uncertain about the future. We don't know what the future is going to be. I could, as I say, I could break my arm tomorrow and I need to go to the hospital and pay for an operation. I need money to do that. And so the argument here is that Bitcoin is the least uncertain. It is the best at doing this alleviation of our future uncertainty. And so that I think gives us a strong reason for why people want to hold Bitcoin. That's reservation demand for Bitcoin. And so I think this is probably good to put to actually chat a little bit about that distinction between Bitcoin and altcoins. Because I think that's really one of the big factors that a lot of people don't understand. There's no, there's no or little raise on debt road to keep holding that token if it's a utility token. And I think that's, that's really that distinction that is worthwhile people understanding. So could you explain how you see that? Yeah, definitely. So I think it's like you said, money is an interesting concept, right? It's basically an intermediary tool that we use to trade various goods and services with. So for example, economic systems inevitably converge on one monetary tool because if we didn't converge on one monetary tool and we had infinite goods and services being traded with each other that kind of defeats the purpose of money to begin with the purpose of money is to find one intermediary tool that we use to trade with every other tool and it's we use it to price things we use it to store value. We use it to reduce future uncertainty. So first I think you have to come to the idea that hey, economic systems and individuals inevitably converge on one monetary tool that monetary tool is the least in certain monetary tool. And we think that's that's Bitcoin obviously. So when you come to that idea, okay, you have to realize, okay, if ETH is not a monetary tool because its futures is very uncertain relative to Bitcoin. What is ETH and how could you could you value it? Well, you could argue in my opinion that ETH is some sort of like semi decentralized equity, right? And so like any equity, all of ETH's value is derived from the estimated present value of future free cash flows and ETH's future free cash flows are based on how busy the network is and how busy it will be in the future. And this will be mainly from transaction fees that's basically ETH's future free cash flows. So you can think of stock buybacks as like fees burning on the Ethereum network and you can think of ETH staking yield as dividends being paid out to ETH holders. And I think it kind of leaves an interesting problem when you realize, okay, it's not money and its future value is built on the idea of future transaction fees on the Ethereum network. It kind of leaves a very interesting problem, right? Because if fees are high, DeFi, if it's even a viable technology or NFTs or whatever is being built on ETH, DeFi will be built on other chains if fees on the Ethereum network are high. And this could be, you know, other like Solana or whatever or Bitcoin side chains potentially as well. So if fees are high, all of this gets built elsewhere. If fees are low, ETH has no future cash flows and the token, you know, is kind of not worth anything because that's how you would derive the value of the ETH token. And so, in my opinion, this means that ETH cannot even successfully scale for it to be a valuable token because if ETH finds the scaling breakthrough, will fees become low and the present value of the ETH token becomes low because that's how you derive the future, the value of ETH needs transaction fees to be valuable. And if he doesn't scale, then fees become high and DeFi gets built elsewhere. So it's kind of this nasty circular feedback loop until ETH has a very low present value in the long run. And I think unfortunately all non-money layer ones have this value accrual problem and it ultimately kind of leads to a security issue for ETH and other non-money layer ones because if the ETH token is not worth enough money, whether it's worth less than, you know, $10 billion, it can't securely settle $100 billion worth of stable coins or wrapped Bitcoin because you could directly, you know, buy the ETH and then use that ETH to change. The transaction finality of all the other assets that are being built on ETH. So I think kind of in the short term, as we've seen, you know, markets can certainly remain irrational people, minting and trading dog tokens and monkey jpegs for billions or millions of dollars. But I think in the long run, like, markets are more of a weighing machine rather than a voting machine and I think ETH generally is designed to trend towards zero. Fascinating. And so let's walk that through just to make sure everyone's following along. So basically put it this way. Bitcoin is very clear about what it is. It's trying to be money, right? And so for that reason, it's trying to be a hard scarce money. And for that reason, there's a reason people want to hold it because it's the, it helps resolve their uncertainty. Now if you're not trying to be money, then you're kind of in this category of being a utility token. But as with any of these tokens, if you even think of like frequent flyer miles where the airlines have an incentive to just print more of them, right, or to devalue them in terms of how you can redeem them, there's this fundamental issue. Why do people want to hold the thing now it's interesting as well because over the years, the Ethereum people have constantly shifted the narrative, right? It kind of comes and goes, right? Because at times they've said, oh no, we're not trying to compete with Bitcoin, we're not trying to be money, we're just trying to be like gas, like you just use this gas token to do this utility thing. But then other times you see them trying to have their cake and eat it too, right? Because there are other prominent Ethereum hoffers who try to say, oh, it's ultra sell money, it's where like, we're reducing the money supply, but you can't have your cake and eat it too. And I think with Bitcoin, we very clearly made that choice, it's money and we're not, you know, that's the most important thing. Whereas with Ethereum, it's sort of, it's not really clear because people in their community seem to want to have their cake and eat it too. They're not willing to just make that choice and say, no, we're just doing this one thing. And I think the other point that you made is that we should view Ethereum more like equity. As Michael Saylor says, it's more like a security, right? Like it is, it is to be classified in that way. I'm not simping for the SEC or whatever, but the character of this thing, the nature of this thing is more like equity. And so it really puts them in between a rock and a hard place because fundamentally they either scale successfully and it's, you know, it's going to fail for because, you know, there's no reason to hold the thing. Or the other way around people go use other chains to do things with. And to be honest, I think that other, that other path around of like, if somehow people, people choosing it as money to me just seems, you know, even a crazy scenario, right? Like it would just have to like why would people choose this thing with this uncertain future, uncertain supply with a foundation that can control it. It's just, you know, there's so many levels and layers of, you know, absurd that you have to go to to actually go there. But even then, I think I appreciate that you're trying to steal man. So you're trying to at least give them like, okay, high, pathetically, what would that look like. Yeah, exactly. I mean, when you look at other assets like the US dollar or Apple stock, for example, during certain periods of time, US dollar and Apple stock could be considered ultra sound money according to their definition, right? So if you look at the shares outstanding over, I think like the last five years or so of Apple, it's slowly decreasing and becoming more scarce. But of course, Apple stock is controlled by a select group of people and that depends on being able to produce future cash flows that enable them to buy back their shares. So the US dollar, it's like, okay, there might be short periods of time where the into money supplies actually decreasing. But in the long run, we know that hey, the only way to get out of this problem is to create more money and encourage people to go into more debt and effectively creating more money. So during short periods of time, Ethereum could be ultra sound money, but at the end of the day, if it's still controlled by a small group of people that have in the past just recently made consensus altering changes to the network. And at least it's certainly more uncertain than the future of Bitcoin to be able to make consensus altering changes. Then there's just like it's a non starter when it comes to being actual, the least uncertain money. And I think probably at this point, like an Ethereum half a might say, oh, look see, but it was always the plan to go to prove a stake and therefore it wasn't just kind of like a last minute rug pool by the centralized foundation is more like, oh, somehow, it's because they're trying to sort of do the mental gymnastics of the, you know, of trying to say, oh, it's like just decentralized enough that it's a security and it's not a security from their point of view. But somehow the community knew this was coming and this was always the plan. And then when things are found out that it's wrong, oh, no, that's, we need a new band aid for that that's coming in a few years time and we're just going to, you know, paper it over with marketing. I mean, it's, it's very interesting. They always are, you know, painting the narrative to match what they think fits best and yeah, I mean, I think it's kind of a non starter and I think like I said, the best way to value it is like, what are the future cash list is going to produce because it's clearly not very certain to be money, even though they say that hey, we're going to do this inevitably, even if it works like the future of the monetary policy is dependent on, you know, how many dog tokens and, and Ponzi's get minted and traded on the network. Is that really a sustainable way to generate ultra sound monetary policy? How would argue it's probably not. Yeah, yeah, I think you've, I think you've done it there. So look, I think that's enough on that stuff, but let's chat a little bit about a bit more broader about where things are going now. I know the first time we spoke on my show was about this idea of valuing Bitcoin and what kind of valuations. So I'm curious if you have any thoughts on that. I know you also put out a some data around like pricing things in sets over the long term. So what's your overview there? Yeah, definitely. The blockboard team blockboard intelligence team actually put out a report somewhat recently within the past six months about analyzing the future purchasing power Bitcoin. And the way that we thought about it and it was similar to how we talked about it over a year ago was hey, Bitcoin is this, you know, the least uncertain monetary technology. And today we don't have a very scarce monetary technology to store value and it's not very. It's it's rather uncertain right, and a lot of people use the US dollars as their monetary technology to value other assets. And so we think because of the dollar is lacking in its future future certainty people resort to other assets to store, you know, massive amounts of their network then you know, most people hold a lot of real estate. They hold a lot of equities. They hold a lot of bonds. They hold all of these other assets except the actual dollar in itself. And in fact, some of the like the wealthiest people in the world actually probably have negative dollars. They owe more more dollars than they actually hold on their balance sheet. And that's because they know that by design the dollars is is going to deflate or inflate against other assets. And so in the purchasing power report that the block routine put out which is on the block or website. We show that hey, these assets are all still going to exist. You're still going to have real estate. You're still going to have equities. You're still going to have things like gold. But their monetary premium will likely get siphoned into Bitcoin itself because now we have this new least uncertain monetary technology to where you don't have to, you know, put up put your money in a massive diversified portfolio of 5,000 different assets. You can just hold Bitcoin and any sort of like technology technology gains that the world creates will kind of go to two separate groups. It could go to the entrepreneurs that created that technology. And it can also go to the Bitcoin holders through, you know, increased competition for the technology making products and services cheaper over time. And so the Bitcoin is kind of this like ultimate savings technology in a way. It's kind of like a productivity index without management fees. And that's kind of what people are looking for in their 401k, but they've just kind of created a very bizarre like diversified way to get that position further portfolio. And I think we can see that also when people show money supply growth and correlation with the markets. Right. And they see, oh, okay. Is it all really just basically correlated to what the money printer is doing. Right. Like is it all just is it really just that simple. So I think the other aspect I've seen you chat about this recently and I know you put out a thread now. Funnily enough. I think you put that thread out in, I want to say December 2019 or maybe January 2021 you were saying look, his, his a thread I did last base. I'm talking about the extreme bull and bear markets in Bitcoin. So in your view, why is that a good thing. Yeah. So a lot of people when they hear about Bitcoin, they think, okay, Bitcoin's maybe cool, but it's very volatile. So how can it be this money? Whereas I kind of look at a different way. Like, okay, Bitcoin is actively being monetized from zero. And the only way for Bitcoin actively be monetized from zero by eight billion people is probably through extreme volatility and extremely rapid growth. Right. I mean, Bitcoin is outperformed virtually every asset over the past 10 years. And it's, you know, still, if you look at entities on the network, even during dark bear markets, more and more people are adopting Bitcoin using it as savings technology and using it ultimately is is an alternative form of money. And so I think that these bull and bear cycles kind of are helpful and actually end up speeding up Bitcoin adoption. We have the bull cycles which, which is where the price just goes crazy. We see more developers come in and we see more institutions come in, we see more speculators come in and we see more Bitcoin adoption generally come in at a more rapid rate. Of course, the price gets kind of overheated relative to what's sustainable at that time and people just kind of get in a speculative frenzy. And then we have these like dark bear markets where we basically end up washing out everyone that doesn't fully believe or understand what they hold. And so I'm just going to be selling it at the low or capitulating and maybe they were over leverage, maybe they understood it, but they just took on too much leverage at the top and ended up getting wiped out near the bottom. And so I'm just going to be able to buy Bitcoin when it's down 70 80% at this point are like true hardcore believers that understand hey, Bitcoin is the least uncertain monetary technology. We discovered and therefore in the long run we're likely to go through another massive bull market until eventually we see global adoption sort of peak and then we can see Bitcoin potentially drawing with global productivity. And I think one point I would add to what you were just saying there is it's often in these big drops that new quote unquote maxi's or maximalist minted. And then after this whole wreckage happens some fraction of those people actually dig in and that's the point where they start maybe listening to a podcast or reading some books or reading your research reports or things like this. And so I think that's been the pattern that I've seen, and this is you know multiple cycles I've seen the same pattern happen and what we typically see is a bunch of people to say yeah you know what I'm going to sell the shit coins, you know, sell the theorem, sell the issue coins and just go to Bitcoin, learn and learn about you know securing my coins running my Bitcoin node, all this kind of stuff. The trend I've seen but I'm curious if you, is that is that what you seen. Yeah definitely I mean that's what kind of my personal experience getting into Bitcoin I saw what happened in 2017 and I remember watching it the price obviously and on Reddit and Twitter knows so interesting because I'd been. As a kid like looking at stocks like looking at something like Coca Cola or IBM like wow you can earn 2% a year in dividends forever if these companies still exist. Whereas this Bitcoin thing just went from $200 in the 2015 like bear market low up to $20,000 like this is insane like obviously something something might be here. And so I kind of dove into the whole crypto space broadly and then during the 2018 bear market I started interacting with other people because I was like okay. You know there's probably something here I don't know what it is exactly but there's something and I personally dove in deeper into okay like what is Bitcoin, why is it important, why is transaction fees per second not like the critical. Stat you need to be looking at when you're comparing different altcoins and Bitcoin and eventually you learn like hey it's not about you know how much transaction you can do per second like you can do a lot of transactions on Visa or PayPal that's not the invention here. The invention is being able to run your own node being confident that Bitcoin is the least uncertain money because of its immutable monetary policy so yeah totally agree I mean I think that. We're going to see more and more people and I think we have seen this bear market with the FTX blow up we've seen more and more people demand self custody because they realize hey I can't trust there's a trust that are trusted third parties. I need to like run my own node take ownership of my Bitcoin take self responsibility and hold the private keys to my Bitcoin and they understand that hey you know it's not FTT token that I need to be buying or or a doge coin it's actually a Bitcoin. Yeah and so when it comes to the broader macro world with the fair and all of this going on I know you were commenting or maybe just kind of speculating that inflation might slow down and then that might actually spur the fed to. At least polls or even start cutting rights as in polls the rising of the rights and then potentially even start cutting rights again. Yeah one thing that I found interesting the last Bitcoin bear cycle. I think when bottomed at the end of 2018 and early 2019 right when the fed paused that rate hiking cycle now you know that doesn't mean that when the fed pauses this cycle that that's going to be the exact bottom for Bitcoin per se like there's certainly things that have changed. Certainly possible that hey inflation is already starting to come down on your for your basis according to CPI and if that does happen and the federal funds rate is relatively high relative to that inflation. It would make sense for the fed to say okay hold on a second like we see that our rate hikes maybe working to bring down the CPI inflation maybe we can pause see how things look for a while and then maybe something ends up breaking in the treasury market and then all of sudden they need to start cutting rates again. And so we're going to be able to get to the next few weeks and send advising more people to borrow take on leverage and then we're back at the another bull cycle for Bitcoin equities and pretty much every asset on earth. Yeah so it's and I think the other aspect people are normally asking is this idea that this is the first time Bitcoin is going through a bear cycle and the broader. So it's also in a bit of cycle words you could argue okay since 2009 and 10 basically it's been mostly a bull market in the in the normal in the fiat asset world some curious people thoughts on that idea. And so it's interesting because in the Bitcoin world or outside the Bitcoin world I guess I think a lot of people have very short time horizons they see Bitcoin was trading at you know 69,000 last year now it's trading at 17,000 and they're like wow this is like obviously a panzy a bubble and we saw the exact same. Like narrative play out the previous cycle where Bitcoin made it up to 19,000 18,000 fell all the way down to 3000 and people were gloating on Twitter like oh Bitcoin was obviously a panzy or bubble, yet even during this macro collapse almost or at least you know the. Some of the largest draw downs we've seen in equities and the treasury market and the history of the treasury market really. But I think that the same thing that hey Bitcoin is still about five x higher now than it was at the previous bear market bottom in 2018 and 2019. So it's very interesting that hey you know Bitcoin is doing actually very well compared to just you know three years ago if you bought the bottom and you held to potentially this bottom. And so you know lose sight of what's really happening in reality and they say hey cherry pick dates like the 2017 top that happened for like two seconds or you know the top of last year and they say hey obviously this is a terrible investment what are you doing. But in reality like Bitcoin is very clearly trending up in the long run even during like very you know treacherous times from a macro perspective. And just on that point on 2017 I think it's worth pointing out a lot of people to say oh 20,000 the whole year that's actually not true. It's for 75% of the year it was under 5,000. So I think it only went about 5,000 around September of that year or so or maybe October and then it was under 10,000 for I think 90% of the year. It was well below 10,000 dollars and it was just that last month or two that it really went crazy so the people cherry pick certain dates and say oh see you're down from the top in 2017. Yeah exactly I mean it's very interesting because like in the short term anyone can Bitcoin contributed any price right like I could sell you one set for one dollar and then all of a sudden Bitcoin's trading at a hundred million dollars. It doesn't mean that that's a sustainable price and obviously people are going to sell if you're going to be bidding that price. But yeah I mean that that's basically what happened in 2017 there's a massive speculative frenzy and obviously the price was unsustainable where global adoption was more hash rate was coming on the network more miners reminding. And that was kind of siphoning you know as more miners start mining they have electricity expenses to pay they have a 6 to buy. Obviously they're going to be selling some Bitcoin to do that because it makes sense to do so at that time. So yeah definitely I mean it's definitely interesting to see like how certain people cherry pick dates to make their point heard. Yeah. Okay so we're talking about a lot I think it's good to just summarize some of the key things just so everyone's following along so. Rewinding back in terms of bitcoins long term security. You think of Bitcoin blocks and confirmations more as being finality rather than security like having more hash rate doesn't necessarily like it's not necessarily making the whole thing more secure per se beyond a certain threshold let's say. And then we're talking a bit about why Ethereum has problems and why it's really caught between a rock and a hard place that they're kind of what they're trying to have their cake in either two. And so yeah we covered a lot of things but I think fundamentally it's that a lot less people are using Bitcoin today than could be right so if that glass node estimate and okay the reports may be a couple months old by now but it's probably still roughly right 32 million entities around the world who are. Storing wolf in Bitcoin and that number we believe is going dramatically up so do you want to. Yeah tell us a little bit out where you see it see it is going as the as the closing fill it then. Yeah definitely I mean Bitcoin is the least uncertain monetary technology and it's not because you know Bitcoin security post blocks subsidy is fine bitcoins the least uncertain monetary technology because anyone can run a full node. All set is a is immutable we can't change Bitcoin supply schedule no single person no single entity can change Bitcoin supply schedule and that's what makes Bitcoin value it's not the miners it's not a government it's not a single corporation it's the users running Bitcoin full nodes holding their own private keys and demanding final settlement in Bitcoin that's what makes Bitcoin valuable. So in the long run I'm extremely bullish on Bitcoin I don't know timing wise what's going to happen I think for for Bitcoin really going another bull run. I kind of expect like the macro situation to have to shift because if if dollars are ultra sound right now and the into money supply is decreasing then it's going to be more difficult for Bitcoin to go on a bull run. So if you're looking at the data we know that fiat money is designed to debase people are are designed to take on debt to buy businesses to buy houses and if money is getting dollars are getting more valuable that's going to cause a major deflationary recession for many people as people default on their debt. So if you're looking at Bitcoin you know is this hard more certain asset where there's only going to be 21 million forever and if you have you know infinitely increasing dollars with only 21 million Bitcoin becoming exponential exponentially more scarce over time as there's more. And I think Bitcoin will just inevitably win in the long run as it simply is the best monetary tool we've ever discovered phenomenal so Joe thanks for joining me and just before we let you go, where can people find you. Thanks for having me on you guys can definitely check out block where solutions dot com which is where I work. We can also check out block where intelligence was just where we put out the recent report with the riot we also put out a ton of other cool reports and we have a podcast there as well so definitely check those out and also I'm on Twitter as Joe Burnett but my handle is three capital I I capital. Thank you.


