---
title: SLP455 Anant Tapadia - Single Sig or Multi Sig?
transcript_by: Beige-Coffee via TBTBTC v1.0.0
media: https://anchor.fm/s/7d083a4/podcast/play/64348045/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2023-1-1%2Ff7fafb12-9441-7d85-d557-e9e5d18ab788.mp3
tags: ['multisig']
speakers: ['stephan livera', 'Anant Tapadia']
categories: ['podcast']
date: 2023-02-01

---

 Hi, you're listening to Stefan Le Verapodcast, a show about Bitcoin and Austrian economic expertise by Swan Bitcoin. Today we're exploring whether you should use single signature or multi signature for your bigger hotling stack. Now of course for day to day spending or certain specific scenarios you may not be thinking about multi-seek but here we're talking more about your hotling and my guest today is an art tapadea from Bit Hive and their team behind Hexawollet and recently Kipper. This show is brought to you by Swan Bitcoin, the easy way to buy Bitcoin and also learn about Bitcoin. Are you looking to add Bitcoin to your corporate balance sheet? It's never been easier with Swan Bitcoin, Treasury Solutions. With Swan Bitcoin Treasury, you can automate your Bitcoin investment, custody and management strategy and you will get expert guidance every step along the way. Now if you are operating a business and you have employees, consider Swan's Bitcoin benefit plan. So basically you can pick an amount and give that to your employees and this makes it easier for you to recruit reward, retain top talent. Swan handles all the heavy lifting like creating worlds, converting currency, routing payments and like magic your employees receive Bitcoin and world class financial education monthly as a benefit from you. So if you're interested go to swan.com slash business. On L2 is a community for Bitcoin builders by Blockstream. This is an initiative and community led effort by contributors and companies building on core lightning and the liquid network. It's an interactive community platform. So if you are a builder, whether you are a product manager, a designer or an engineer, you can come together through events. There will be mentorship programs available to fast track your success and also a community space to learn something new alongside other Bitcoin is building the future of Bitcoin layer two. Sign up now for early access on the platform. It's build on L2.com. Are you still using a plain old Block Explorer? Mimple.space shows you the multi-layer ecosystem of Bitcoin. Mimple.space is a comprehensive Bitcoin explorer that covers this ecosystem from the Mimple to the blockchain to secondly networks like the lightning network. With Mimple.space, there's no need to trust the third party. It's free and open source. You can host it yourself with one click on various full-node distributions. Now if you are with an enterprise, remember Mimple.space offers custom Mimple instances you can have your company's branding, increased API limits and so much more. Go find out over at mimple.space slash enterprise. And now onto the show with Unant. Anant, welcome back to the show. Yes, you've earned. Thanks for coming in. So there's been a lot going on. I think the conversation around learning to self-custodies always an important wine. It's always one that's very fresh on my mind as well. And so we're seeing a lot of discussion. I think recently of course there was the news about Luke Dashia losing his coins. I think I don't know exactly how many but probably something in the range of 200 Bitcoin. So a series of anacorn. And so there's been a lot of people making some noise about this statement. Right? They've been saying, oh, look, even if a Bitcoin core developer couldn't secure his coins and what hope does the average person have? They've been saying this kind of narrative. Of course, I disagree with that strongly. So I wonder how are you think about that? See, self-custody, I would not like to claim that self-custody is, you know, the mentally the easiest things to do. It is a new way to secure your stuff. So it is going to be, there are mental hurdles where people are trying to do it. There are going to be new things that people have to learn. And it does not come without self-responsibility. So no matter how developers and builders want to make it easier, it doesn't come without learning and it doesn't come without self-responsibility. Having said that and having understood that this is journey even five years done in the last event, we'll be talking about self-custody. And why self-custody, what other things can make self-custody more secure like them, any word proposal or any new, odd court people are proposing. So there will always be improvements in self-custody. And the new one, you can see words that we use, that was not obvious there. So what I'm trying to say is that the self-custody is a journey. There is no perfect self-custody solution. And also self-custody solution is very personal. So in case of specifically the incident you're talking about, it is very specific and a very, very niche case. It's not going to, it's to, it doesn't really, it is more for foot. It doesn't really apply to normal users. No one is going to probably have like a custom security solution like he had. It's almost non-issue for regular horrors. But he has there is an aspect of if a start questioning okay, is there self-custody solution proper? Is it, you know, there is something more than they can do about it and you know the whole conversation starts again. And this is going to happen again and again. But as you will me know and what I've understood from that situation, most of it was honestly, it is more preferred because I don't know if there was even a core storage gailing work, the way we term core storage air gap storage. So there are moving parts and it is a developing story. We don't know how the details are. So once we know all the details are fit, probably there will be some learnings out of it. But we already know that you know you shouldn't roll your own self-custody solution to be being stuff that is very custom-pre- yourself and it is not really something with people who have used and tried and have to be not tried and tested. So these are the few things that you can already talk about that incident. So to the whole question around should people self-custody, what we end up having is a lot of conversation around what is the best way, right? We see people saying, oh just, you know, multi-signature is too complex. People say things like you should only do single signature with a pass phrase. That seems to be if I had to assess, let's say the meta on Bitcoin Twitter or online discussion. That seems to be the meta. They say, oh multi-sign, it is in the too hard basket for most people. Obviously, I disagree again. I think it is more like, you know, if you are a beginner, you should use maybe a guided solution, like have a professional help you. And intermediates and advanced level people you can learn. It is not that hard. I'm saying it. I'm curious how you see it, like single signature or multi-signature. See, we first of all, yes, you know, RSTs have been making the Bitcoin products for a while and become from single-signature. Exhausted is a single-signature solution. It has all the aspects of typical single-signature, not for what a wallet does. And we can come to the deconstruction of the wallet which will probably really help some of the listeners. But essentially, we come from that space. So definitely a very neat solution for people who are just getting started or people who have, you know, you know, small amount of money, obviously that is subjected. But essentially, you know, not like life savings or stuff like that. But when it comes to something that you want to hold for a long term, right? You don't want to hold it for six months and just trade it off. And you want to, and it is a significant amount of wealth, multi-signature, customer-to-six solution is definitely something you should consider. Consider it, understand it, and then probably you can strip take a call that you know for me, single-signature, with the hardware wallet and past decision. That's a fair thing. If you have a safe or if you have a place where you can keep your hardware wallet and you are 100% sure less than you want is going to have a touch it. And here is I will do automatically if you get it out. Then probably, you know, that might be the solution for you. So my message for a lot of people who are talking, so I talked a lot of single-signature people and while you are building, keep it over the last one, you have been talking to a lot of people who are interested in my message. So I do know both sides of the argument. So my message for everyone who have significant wealth and what have voted for long-term is actually considered it properly and then take a call. And what I have seen is a lot of people who consider malicious properly, right and look at a guided solution like a reserved and the way we have built keeper, they actually come to appreciate monetization. And so I think what we see is a lot of discussion about the complexity, the added complexity, the backups aspect, the dealing with let's say if you are trying to do it, you know, the right way or the proper way with different hardware devices and so on. I can understand, there's a little bit of extra complexity, but I think my thinking on this is guided more by my friend Michael Flaxman, I think he's coming from that. He's more of a, in the multi-sign maxi camp and I think his view is like, it gives you fault tolerance, right? It gives you this extra level of security. You just need to know how to do the backup correctly. And you have to do certain things in the right way in the basic way that you get these basics right. And then once you get those right, you are just so much more secure. So that's how I'm seeing it. So if you were advising somebody and let's say this person is now an intermediate or advanced level, you know, they're not a beginner anymore. They're quite comfortable with their single signature setup. Why should they consider a multi-sick in your, in your view? See, I think you, you mentioned it correctly is that the security guarantees of resilience your tolerance that multi-sick offers you. You don't really get that basic technique. Okay, you can add pastries to it. It adds a little bit of resilience in terms of attack vector, but it also adds another single point of failure. So it's not really people try to recreate the multi-sick using, you know, a combination of pastries and single-sick and, you know, kind of keeping multiple copies of it, but essentially the, the real, the real optionality or the resilience that multi-sick gives you that those security guarantees you cannot get with single-sick. Right. And some of the things people see, when you do single-sick, if you really break down single-sick, if you deconstruct what simply happens in a single-sick, then you would realize that actually single-sick, the attack vectors or the, or the places where you can get attacked for a font-gen single-sick, actually is the same as multi-sick, while in multi-sick, you have multiple entities. So you can minimize the trust, right? Let me try and explain that a little more. So let's take a single-sick and deconstruct it. So there are essentially just four key aspects to the whole system. So the first step really is to finish the user would generate an entropy, right? That's the first step. The second step is second part of it, the step of it is how is that backed up? So there's an entropy. It is backed up. Then the third step is from the entropy, public and private keys are created, right? Public keys are used for receiving funds and balance checking in all that, which we typically call it wallet functions. And the fourth category is the signing part of it which is done by private keys. Now if you look at these four functions, these four functions can actually be performed by completely separate entities. Okay, let's take an example. So entropy generation, you can use a simple dice roll or seed picker or something as to generate the entropy. It doesn't involve any wallet or any hardware device. You can use them as a but that's an example. Then you could go away and store that entropy in terms of seed words on a metal seed bread, right? So you could use a mobile device as a watch only, watch only wallet with the expo. And you could receive funds on that. While you could put, you know, use a seed signer which is a state device. You could put the seed in it, everything is signing in or using the seed QR and to the signing from that device. So what you see here is that there are four parts to it which are completely, can be handling different ways. What happens in typical, typical wallet is some of these functions or a lot of these functions are combined together. In the simplest case, I would have one app which just the entropy generation, it does the backup, which does the receiving part and which also signs the turn. This is the simplest one. Simple as mobile app. The most common what we see is the interface that other than the backup, all the three functions are combined in the typical mobile app. So for example, ExhaVolette would generate the entropy, you would store a copy of it separately and then the receiving of funds and the balance taken all that wallet functions and the signing happens from within the same one. So if you see these three functions are combined in different ways to give rise to different solutions. In all of these situations, the wallet which is used for signing or receiving funds, they are the places where there can be some tax or there can be some vulnerabilities. For example, if during the receiving part, the wallet might simply retain the receive address. If you don't check it, then the funds if I'm receiving funds from you, I should not address that I think is mine, but it is someone else's company legal. Right? So ExhaVolette shows you wrong address and you send money to that money is completely gone. Now let's bring this multi-segan. The same four things happen in multi-segan, but with the multiple of these keys combined. Now, these functions that there are different like the example you took of multiple vendors. Like multiple vendors are involved, you could actually, by following some simple thumb simple thumb rule, you can actually check that receiving address, let's say in two of the entities. And you're so much safer. There's not a single wallet which cannot tag and change your receive address. If you check the receive address on the wallet and maybe one of the hardware device, it will be really difficult for someone to actually collude across those two systems and you know, steal your funds. So I'm going into the real details of it, but if you're really abstracted way back up again, the trust is the really can minimize the trust across multiple vendors and multiple locations and multiple platforms. If you use a multi-segan store of a single set. Right. And I think that's a really important point to understand. And when we have multi-segan, it just gives us this whole new level of being able to check things. So for example, we can design things in such a way and I know, you know, step on is not as step on Snidgeriv. He is not as, you know, actively contributing in the space nowadays, but I think he was popularizing this idea of how can I make a wallet or something where even if the coordinator was lying, it could, you know, or how can I set something up where even one of the devices is lying, I'm still safe. And so in a multi-segan context, it gives you that full tolerance, right? Because now the coordinating software, whether that's, you know, a specter, desktop or sparrow or it's, you know, unchained capital or it's nunchuck or it's keeper, which at whatever that cool, even if the coordinator app is lying to you, if you're checking that transaction on the device or in the case of receiving, you are checking your receive address on the actual device, then you are whole, another level safer because it's much hard for somebody to compromise you and steal your coins. And then this becomes very valuable once we're talking about your life savings or even for a corporate context or a fund or a trust or any of these business entities or other legal entities that need that have a very high security requirement. So I think it's such an important thing, but some of the main hurdles, let's say, that for most people, what would you say are some of the main hurdles that people have to using multi-sick? Like so I'm sure you've had many conversations with people who are probably doing single-sick or just single-sick with a passphrase, what kind of excuse do they give you or reason do they tell you, this is why I don't want to do multi-sick? Yeah, so to like our student there is definitely a learning curve, then there is a learning curve and you come to Bitcoin, self-custody itself is a learning curve and within self-custody multi-sick is definitely a student-excuse keeper learning curve then just because there's a lot of education available around you know how to backup seed phrases and how to use a simple synemic water and in this case of single-sick wallet if you if you just listen to like a 500 thing you would understand but in case of multi-sick yes it is operationally more difficult, right? You have to ensure more things it does but that does give you an order of magnitude better security like we explained it's simply impossible for one key one coordinating app to collude with another hardware manufacturer and maybe one more other hardware manufacturer even somewhere across the globe to steal just your coins so it's almost it's it is very difficult, it's sort of magnitude difficult so coming back to the problem to the hard decision that this is this operational difficulty is one, right? And that is why it is very important that this is kind of guided process it's not like you can you are trying to do it with a command line but there's some going to results in kind of guided process which takes you through different steps as you have every step okay what does this mean maybe do this go into the hardware wallet at this particular place and then then try to extract the expert or something like that so there's a guided process yes it will be slightly longer but it will be hand held in such a way that the operational part of it becomes not that much difficult so that's one of the excuses or not excuses it's a reason let's say it to be fair to them right not an excuse let's say reason see well I was talking to one of the guys who was in in advertising he's a very creative but he loves but guy loves the idea of it but he just doesn't have the time to you know understand multi-sick beyond he you're forgetting oneself because study was a few years to getting one multi-sick would be another few years which is to be again to be fair to him he is busy he's doing this creative stuff he's not really it doesn't have the time on the condition to learn about multi-sick so that is a genuine reason but that's why products that we are you know the we are building a lot of people are building nowadays the cotton tinks of players are actually you know it's a little kind of an assisted multi-sick so that's one the second is the cost the cost is definitely a factor so if you do a 305 multi-sick it might be you know somewhere around 500 dollars for you that's the that's probably a good 305 multi-sick you can probably reduce the cost by trying out some combinations or using some software based keys instead of hardware based keys and if you use some of these keys it is it is quite okay in terms of security so there's a cost to it the cost can come down by you know decent combinations plus there are a lot of people a lot of companies who are trying to build products which are low or cost like taps and is like jade like there are few other audits so the costs are going to come down so these two similar main hurdles are hard and the cotton litings of where are trying to you know go our assisted multi-sick well hardware one of the manufacturers that tractor reduce the cost so hopefully this is going to become easier to tease you yeah and you know it may be it may be a question of another cycle or two for the multi-sick user experience to get better and popularize this further I'm bullish on this though I do believe it'll come maybe in a cycle or two because once you have a lot of people who have a lot of value in in fiat terms purchasing power of terms it'll just be so much more applicable for them but I certainly appreciate that today there are some operational difficulties you have to think about okay is it more difficult to use these different wallets right as opposed to just having one cold card or one device or whatever you're using now you might have to think okay I need to know how to use a cold card and you know a seed signer and a tap signer and a coba or a keystone rather you know whatever pick your mix and not just that whoever is recovering your coins right because now we've also got to think about okay you or me and aren't you and I could probably figure it out like even you know a bit can out wives and kids figure this out you know that's like that's like the the other level too right yeah absolutely have that that is where standardization really helps um if you if you talk about learning how to use different how do you all it's all signing devices then if it is a standard way that those devices work it is much more easier right probably if you learn one of them probably you can use one of the one same as you know uh using a phone if you use one type of phone there's a good chance that you know whether you're a little bit of learning you can use one of the phone because they have been adopted a lot and there are some basic you know assumptions of basic capabilities that have been developed so if there is there's more standardization around how these things are used then definitely it's going to get easier and easier right so we have ESBT standard we have you know the waves we have we have the you know more very importantly product disruptors, output disruptors and ESM S and all these good standards which are developing which is going to make this learning uh easier because if you learn it for one device you will probably know it for another device so that's that all these things are going to be done yeah sure and so let's talk a little bit about the multi-seq set up process right just so people understand what's going on there right so let's just keep it simple right let's just say it's a two or three with three different device types and where coordinating that what are some of the different steps involved to set up this multi-seq and operate that multi-seq so let's let's go back to the brief instruction earlier right and it is going to be exactly the same first there is a step of generating the entropy in this case as there are three devices you will generate it in three different presses this itself is going to give you you know no single product failure but let's say you have a laser called card and let's say Jade on a seed signer when you initialize those devices you can use uh you can use an existing you know like a seed phrase you would have or you can generate a new one from those devices you think even at past phrase there so now what you've done is you have three devices who have generated different entropy okay so that pieces done then to be generation with the first piece now how do you back it up you can back it up as a device itself for example you know you just want to take care of the device and put it in a save and additionally for the more you can actually put them those sieboards in a reddle format on on steam and keep it somewhere else so that the backup stack is step-to-step and care of now you have three devices ready and they're backup secured the two steps are done now what you would do is you would take those devices to an app like keeper you would create the multi-seq right what what creation of multi-seq that really step means is multi-seq is not really created at that point but the path but you your wallet has the capability of generating the addresses which can be signed with a script which is a two or three from these three ones so what you would do is you would uh you would communicate with these three hardware wallets either through NFC or QR code and fasten the X-pop relevant X-pop to the product coordinates of the coordinates of the coordinating software only has the X-pop which is which are the public key generators which is the public key generator it still doesn't have any control of the priority yep so just to be clear this is like there's a special menu in some cases right because it's not necessarily the same as the one that you would use for that device in single signature mode so for example in coldcard you go into settings and you have multi-seq-nature export I think it's in advanced or settings and in there you go to multi-seq export take that out into a SD card put that in and then the coordinator app has to sort of take all of those three all right so so exactly so I think that's an important step because single-seq and multi-seq from uh hard different standards so it is good to you know use the right X-in right X-pop in the right path so you would go into the settings and you would follow the steps to import these three X-pop from these three devices right and when you do that you can do that through an SD card in keeper you know you can use NFC for coldcard and stuff like that so that's slightly more secure and operational is yeah you don't really need another computer to get in the middle so that's that's what you would do now now your coordinating software has all the necessary pieces to make sure that you can you know produce addresses which are which can be sent by that strip so that is the creation part now the sending part is let's start with this story at this point we also do need to once you've created that multi-seq then we need to register the qualms into those devices right so that's the other step where you now the coordinating software with a specter or sparrow or keeper will give you a little piece of information which again you either use with a SD card or you you do the QR scan back and forth and then those devices can now register and understand are these are the other devices in my multi-seq so let's say you know I've got this code card and I know that okay there's a seed signer in my quorum and a keystone or whatever other device and then you have to well theoretically like if you want to be really secure you want to check okay and you can read on the device these are the other X-pop associated for this device so you can kind of check everything make sure it's all you know matching up yeah so I was trying to explain the receive journey so that it is easier to understand why registration is needed right so absolutely important the registration step but why it is needed is because how does receive happen is the coordinating software takes these X-pop completely independently of how do I want to say it will show you a particular receiver address and you would you know one way of doing it you just send the money to that receiver address and you will have funs if the coordinating software is not trying to be you know be trying to steal your forms then when you are signing it you know sending transaction in an you know in a happy case scenario you would the coordinating software will build the transaction up right using using the details that it has it will construct a PS something called PSBT which is partially signed with quantization is just a format of how transaction is represented with additional data and then it communicates again by NFC or Bluetooth or QR code with these hardware devices right or signing devices and they would sign these transactions now there are few things which can go wrong here and that's why you correctly mentioned the registration step then because the coordinating software has the central role of combining the X-pop it has the central role of receive generating the PSBT which you know a signed device would sign what if the coordinating software is trying to cheat what if the coordinating software is trying to manipulate these things though it doesn't have the private keys but it can manipulate the signing devices to sign the wrong PSBT or you know you know give them the wrong address so that is where the registration step is super important adding you described it well registration basically means the coordinating software is saying by the way this is the policy or the or the multi-sec configuration I'm trying to do. Do you want to store those details and at this step the user would look at the details that is getting stored they would probably call it code storage or they would probably call it you know save for what or what are they going to call it and then they would store that in their signing devices now what is happening created multiple copies of the same configuration right so next time when signing or receiving happens coordinating app cannot cheat you independently you can always have you all you still have three other entities that you can check and say okay there is something wrong here so registration is a super important step which lets the signing devices independently verify there okay you know if if coordinating app or any of the signing devices is trying to cheat on them so that's that's essential you know fundamentally benefit of yeah right and then so as we're going through and we're checking so you know just just making sure I'm summarizing everything so we had our three devices we've initialized all three of them we we either brought or did our own entry or we used the device entropy to create a 24 word seat or a 12 word seat then we ingest the the multi-seag x-pop out of those three into the coordinator now the coordinator has the built together policy let's say two or three now we register the core into each of those devices so now each of those devices knows the other device and then you the human should obviously be checking that and making sure okay x-pop okay it matches to the other x-pop there's no lying here there's no you know everything matches up everything's good I've got my two or three yes take that and now what's next so we'll now we can receive let's say a test a small amount of coin into this wallet and you can check that on multiple devices right because some of these devices have an address explorer which is really useful it's a great feature because now you can you can see it on device one you can see it on device two and device three or maybe if you what you do is you would check a quorum of the devices right maybe if you're running a two or three you might check it on two of the devices and then see okay on the coordinator it's also shown to the same address okay good now I can receive some coin into this address right absolutely so testing and even if you know by a new car testing it out first for a trial and is always there's nothing that it cannot go wrong so testing it the way you said is a great idea and we recommended and testing it for sending and receiving and doing you know small bits here and there is definitely something user should do before they transfer more of their fund there are a few checks these that these signed devices do automatically for example the change address when you're receiving funds there is there is just single single letters but when you're sending funds there is an address that you send to but any of that change because you take so it's like a single piece that when the it uts a breaks a piece of it comes back to your change address now there is a potential with the coordinating as according to software just you know manipulates and puts their own change address so this change address is something that any of the devices which have been registered properly can take automatically the user doesn't have to manually check it that's a very neat feature and a very simple thing because the change address is incorrect the the CSI device will simply not sign it so that's that's a kind of check under the hood that happens because only because there are multiple devices and you register with them so that's pretty neat that may not happen in a single single you're just using mobile mobile app and you have just you have a scene case written on somewhere so these are the these are this is an you know some of the addition benefits yeah and the reason we mentioned this as well is because they have been some attacks like this disclosed you know historically now I'm not sure if the change one was necessarily used or exploited in the world but it was there for some time and then on obviously manufacturer has found it it got patched up and so on and so now there's a much better there's a much better awareness and understanding in the industry and I think the products the software and the hardware are being built with this in mind right so that's that's there that's useful so what's next in the journey let's say so I think if you want if you're really paranoid and if you really want to get to that level there's one more step you could do so what you've done you have set it up you have registered it check the details that's like the theoretical checking of it then you've done a practical piece where we actually send around funds and you have checked there there's those funds are showing up probably or not this one most step you could do is basically there are now multiple coordinating software as well right you know initially there was only there's only a electron like a electron that's it nothing as you couldn't really know another word others were close source so you couldn't do much but with the help of you know in the returning the last year there were many more there's para the specter there's luncher there's keeper what you could do is recreate the world let's say have created a lot of three in keeper you could take the output descriptors which you can talk about in a little bit but basically the wallet configuration put it in sparrow right and check whether it is showing the same addresses and when you're doing the testing at that time also you can check the balance from sparrow and from keeper you can try to send from sparrow and check it and keeper so now what you have you also have a redundancy or multi-denancy there's a electron but multiple places you can check the coordinating software back to the show in a moment now as we're talking about multi-segmenture unchained can help you with multi-segmenture but this is particularly important if you are a beginner and you need a guided pathway into multi-segment with unchain capital you can create a two of three vault where you hold two keys and unchain holds the third key now they can guide you into this process they have a concierge onboarding program you can pay upfront they will ship you some hardware devices if you need them and they will do a call with you and walk you through that process and unchain have a really easy platform to use which is perfect for you if you are a beginner and you just need some help to guide you through this process they also have an inheritance checklist which comes as part of the concierge onboarding programs so this can help you in terms of having things like a step-by-step checklist letters for the executor or trustee and other things go to unchain.com slash concierge to get this and finally coincites.com are my favorite producer of hardware signing devices most notably the cold card but they have a range of products and gear that you will find really handy with the cold card obviously it's one of the most popular bit coin hardware signing devices you can use it in single signature or you can use it as part of a multi-segmenture and it has all these features that really make it easy for you to do that so you can register the multi signature forum you can check the addresses on the device which gives you some more security you can initialize the whole thing offline without even connecting to a computer so there's so many features and it's such a reliable and versatile player that you can use as part of your pitcoin security setup so go to coincite.com or your cold cards and other gear there use code libera and you'll get a discount on your cold cards now back to the show. Yeah I guess it's just an extra layer of verification right and certainly these are things that you do when you set up your multi-segmenture and so I think this is a great way for people to give themselves that piece of mind as well because this is one of those things that's really kind of crazy but it's this idea that the keys can be ported are portable in a way that you can take the key like theoretically I could have set up that same key in like a treasure but then imported into a cold card and it's going to sign the same way it's going to sign the same coins in a way so that's kind of useful and that's a step that you know people are doing to help verify okay my access to my coins is you know or another one that people might do is do a test recovery right like let me send you know $30 into this multi-segmenture and then just practice all I've lost one of the devices or I've lost this other thing can I recover you know have I have I have I have I have the right pieces together to be able to recover if something goes wrong and then this can give you that extra piece of mind okay I was able to recover okay I'm safe right and the best part is if you know is that every single user doesn't have to do this if a lot of users have done it initially or you know some users do it regularly then if any of these pieces if any one of the coordinating software any one of the hardware devices do try to do something funny they'll be caught so the incentive to actually try to steal funds when there are a lot of entities involved is actually reduced so this is the very very key part see one of the things in Bitcoin we know is the securities also because of the numbers right because there are so many private keys possible it's not easy to guess them it is not the same scheme but the idea is if you have multiple entities then you can minimize trust in any one of them you don't need to test a according being software I can use another one I don't need to use a signing device I can use another one right so as these things develop and we have like 12 or 13s and devices available now of five or six coordinate are absolutely available now so this becomes easier and easier people will get more and more confident about it there's a lot more talking about it lot more education then it goes about it people who are listening to this podcast might you know come back with questions they might feel slightly more comfortable so things are converging with standard with the ecosystem and the education and I'm like you're like you're a server also a very bullish on policy yeah yeah and so let's talk about spending now so let's say I've set up my two or three and now I want to send some coins to you on art so I say on art give me an address I'm going to pay you you know 0.01 Bitcoin or whatever what steps do I go through perfect so if I give you an address and you have a two or three multi-sex setup the first thing to do is to check that address I probably you know I'm showing it showing it to you on a screen or I have you know message you that particular address so when you when you put that address in your coordinating software and the coordinating software would probably take you know produce a B.S.B.T transaction you would take it to your first hardware device right on that hardware device the first thing is to make sure that you check whether that send to addresses correct or not that's the first step the like I said the change addresses automatically checked if that particular device is registered okay so these are the two checks that happen during sending we've all the device are registered so all you have to do because they're successfully registered if you have chosen the right wallet from the from the signing device then these these are the these are the checks that happen and I think maybe it's also so obviously in this case it's a two or three so I'd have to go and let's say I have one device at home and then another device in a vault or some other location somewhere I have to go to that other location and do a get the signature from that device or from that you know signing device to get the second signature bring that back to you know the coordinating application so in this case if it's capable or spectator or sparrow or whatever and then once I've ingested that second PSB.T signature then it'll say ah this transaction is now valid and you can broadcast it right absolutely yeah I think you have to explain the user steps really well so those of the checks that happen at one place but then you take it to another location the same kind of check you can do there you can check there a saving address at your own office or any other location you have then you port it back to the coordinating software not the coordinate software because specific transaction has been same and there's no way to further coordinating out because it doesn't have the private keys to change it you can let the coordinating app you know about cause the transaction right and I think one other point just on practicality that might be useful for some people I think I've been because I've been playing around with devices for years right so I think for me in practice I have found there are times where qars can be difficult right so because the qar flow like as an example if your it depends on the device you're using sometimes the resolution is bad or the the camera on the other device is bad and so one tip that I've found useful is if you can have the qar scanning device that could be maybe your home device and then if you got like one that's in a vault as an example and you might have a mix right you might have a mix in your quorum and so then the devices in the vault maybe they can be a little bit easier to have a microSD for signing because they are a little I think it depends on the flow right it depends on the coordinating app and everything but if you just have a microSD card and you're just going into the vault area or into an office or somewhere then maybe it's a little easier to kind of get the signature done because if you're kind of out in a remote location and you're trying to scan the qar and the signature is not working and you know things like this where it can be a bit difficult right so I think in that case it might be a little easier now of course there is NFC is also there's NFC devices things like you know the the tap signer is an example but I guess there is one downside with devices like the tap signer is you're getting less um yeah because it's you can't check the addresses on this thing you can't there's less that you can check about the transaction so you know there's there's tradeoffs with all of these things it is a cheaper device but um I guess if you're storing serious serious money will then maybe you're going for the device the the bigger devices with a screen and with a keypad and things like this um so those are a few tips I guess that I would just offer for listeners as well when you're thinking about if you're crafting your own multi-seg yeah okay so let's talk a little bit about the backups and the output descriptor and bsms can you decipher a little bit of this at least current state of play as we talk you know today's the 31st of January 2023 what's the current state of play with multi-seg and backups see one thing so you might want to mention because you're doing very important point when you are keeping something in the shape anyone who uses decar versus QR code one of the things people forget is some of these devices used to not have a battery right uh so what you don't want to do is actually get that device back into your home and then do this stuff and then take it back right so if you have it in a safe it is not about idea either that you know most of the new devices that's where they have some kind of battery the new ledgers the g8 they have battery or if you have like code card that requires a battery this is not about idea just carry the battery with you so carry the battery and as you get it's the guard with you you know just do the piece there either through QR code or SD card and then come back do not carry the sign you don't have to carry the signing device back you think you can keep it back safe right yeah so just to explain there so the idea here is let's say we've got a two or three multi-seg and just going like a big amount of coin on this or whatever the whole point is to not have to have like okay yes at the start when you set up that core yes all three devices can be in the same location because you haven't put any coins on there but once you put coins on then you don't want to bring them back together because theoretically you're vulnerable at that point right like if a criminal or someone comes to you know try to attack you at that point you're vulnerable yes even at creation actually because the way P is between multi-seg versus not really interactive that is you can actually not have them at the same location any one right yeah of course yeah so you can do one one important you know yeah I mean I was just saying more from a practicality because you might want to let's say you want to set it up and then test recovery test with smaller amounts before you separate the devices and put them into you know different locations one in the mountain one in the you know one in the vault one in the office one in the you know somewhere so I think that's probably where I was saying that just from a practicality point of view but then once they once you put the coins on there like series coin on there then you don't want to pull them together because now you know that's where the risk is so anyway we're talking about that let's get back to the backup's question so you know typically this means you save a pdf or an output descriptor or bsms he tells what's the current state of play there yeah so so why do we need these these output descriptors of work competition is because even if you have two of the three keys you cannot recover your phone right as you know repeat that in a multi-save if you let's say in a 35 multi-save it doesn't mean that if you have three of the five keys you can completely you can not completely you cannot even recover any of your funds the reason being is that okay you have the three keys to the safe let's imagine another safe right so you have three keys of the safe and you can open the safe but how do you find that safe right how do you get to that safe that is the map you know in that terms is what the word configuration is and that word configuration or the multi-save configuration files contains the map details that is basically contained the other public details of the other keys that you would need to need to unlock your funds basically or get access to your funds just just want to be clear why multi-save configuration files are so important now that is where things like output descriptors and you know bsms and all these things come through so output descriptor is it's a very neat standard it takes care of all the different aspects of what a configuration means configuration doesn't just mean the expo also means the path and the script type that you're using and stuff like that right so that is what forms the output descriptor in a simple sense of not getting into time login multi-save yet but that's an output descriptor and if you have the output descriptor and if you have the minimum number of keys you can definitely access the funds if you have three keys of the file and you have the multi-save configuration file or output descriptor you do not need the other two keys that's the importance of it output descriptor is a format which a lot of wallets use now there like as if there are multiple pieces in there like the expo of the path the you must have fingerprint the script type so these are the part of output descriptor I would say an improvement to that is the bsms which is bit coin secure multi-sic setup I think but bsms essentially has the output descriptors given a specific output descriptor template but it also has some other details one very neat detail that bsms has is actually it has the first address of the multi-save right I really like this part and why that is important so let's imagine you have these five devices one of the option after registration is you go away and check all these five devices for all the expobs all the paths and all the derivations in this and that right there's one we're going it but alternatively what you could do is you could if it's a normal multi-sic you can just check the first address right because the first address is a derivation of all these components so if the first address is correct ah is it it's matching across the five devices then there is no way they could have changed one of the expobs or they could have changed one of the paths because they will not get the first receiving address so by checking one piece you have to share you have actually checked multiple of these multiple of these right as you were mentioning the bsms has the first address and so you're saying that basically because the first address is going it has to be the same then it's I guess you're saying that's the reason why you find it useful as a wallet developer when you're coding or making and building this right even from a user point of view instead of checking for like five different things because they have to check all the cosine and expobs so if they have to check five expobs plus they have to check the five derivation paths plus they will object the five ah you know script types because any of this going wrong where you mean that it's a completely different world so if instead of that what you could do in a simple case there are complex case where there doesn't apply but in a simple case what that means is if you reject the first address you essentially have checked all the input parameters to the first address so if I check this one address across the five device I know it is the right registration so these are the kind of you know improvement that are happening from a standard point of view and that is well I said the real standards are leading the world so better you will extend from a basic space I say yeah okay and so let's talk a little bit about capabilities specifically let's talk a little bit about some of the I'll sorry one other thing so with this whole output descriptor bsms I guess the important point just for people to remember is that you can keep multiple backups of this now yes it impacts your privacy but it all it helps your redundancy and your ability to recover if something goes wrong so this piece this output descriptor the bsms the wallet configuration file whatever it's called make sure you have multiple backups of that you might even think about having a copy of that with your lawyer or someone who you're doing inheritance planning with because it'll be a central as part of the recovery process there so that's just something to keep in mind one thing you could put with those files is which is very practical is if you have the same devices let's say in a safe you can keep a copy there if you have like three devices in three safe in three different locations this keep one copy with each of them so even if you yeah get a USB point one I yeah or you can just like have it in a PDF or something so that's a very practical way of doing it what's some of the hardware what's also doing this is when you register this is very neat when you register you're actually giving those details to the hardware model example code code let's you export that back so now I don't need to store another copy of the what configuration with a cold card if it's in a safe I can use the same word configuration from cold card to you know get that back so you know things are becoming much easier you have to keep that separate this is right yeah so it's even more redundant see then so let's talk a little bit about the inheritance stuff because I know this is something you are looking at for Capre as well so what's the plan there so in here it has the way we have inheritance capital within different ways right a lot of you know they've extreme but one might say okay I don't care about the legal aspects of it and I just want to make sure my coins are safe and I can pass it on some even believe that they just want to dive with their coins and just you don't need it to the network I am not of that looking in I want to plan it for generations and I you know not of people want to do it that way once you have a few suggestions that you can look at you would go to pass that well thought for for generations so when you're bringing inheritance planning there are two aspects to it one is obviously that access to the keys and then the second is the right to have the keys right when it is about the right it is the legal construct of your jurisdiction that you have the right towards the keys a lot of time this aspect of the legal title or the rights to have the keys is messed up okay what we want to do with keeper is try to we want to look at both these aspects and assist in both these things okay if you you know if let's say your partner is going to get the coins up if something happens to you and you told them all the locations where you know two of your three of your advice is that then probably you know it's the access part of is easy but there is no reason that you know someone else after you are not there can claim that okay that person has access to it but actually that person is not the right for owner then there would be an mix and you don't want to get the you know let them have get into that kind of situation so that is why you know having your legal title clear it's very easy it's not very complicated is a very important way to secure things make it easy for your loved ones that they don't have to get into hassle of first figuring out where the keys are and then also trying to prove that why you know the keys belong to the rightful owner or air of those coins directly so these are the two aspects what keeper does is obviously it tells you what are the safeguarding tips like we talked about using a battery using the SD card of how to secure your keys and not just for yourself you might remember the pin but what about someone else you are you know your kids are trying to access with would they know the pin so it gives you a lot safeguarding tips of how to secure your keys a not just for yourself even for future generations and that's the access part of it it also helps you identify those that to all that particular wallet or the multi-seq wallet in a very unique way so that you can you know put a simple part of your will that okay you know I have funds in this particular multi-seq and this is how we identify this multi-seq and anyone you know this person is always said is actually the rightful owner of them how I get how do they get access can it doesn't have to be put in the will at all so that you know if you don't want to trust your lawyer or the guard was right in the will you don't have to put the access part there at all but you do have to put how you can uniquely identify those things and how that particular fund belongs to there yeah I mean there's all these privacy concerns aspects of a two because there are people who might say I don't want to disclose you know how many coins I have or whatever so some of that is going to be a little bit you have to find a way so we have actually we have been actually we think we have found a way and we've been talking to a lot of lawyers and a lot of people in this space how this makes sense and we've got we've got great feedback on that so what you put in the put in the put will doesn't have to it doesn't have to be the expo you don't really need to put the expo you can put your master fingerprint there you can put some other details there which doesn't leak privacy at all right so there are some other ways of establishing the uniqueness basically what you want to do at the end of it is in the will if there is an air because uniquely identified that this is the air this is the legal name this is where the labor those kind of details and you have uniquely identify or as best as possible uniquely identified which forms then essentially you can you know that's that's all that will need so using other methods that you know that then putting expo is you know they to get across the privacy issue got you yeah and certainly as I mentioned for like some people might be comfortable with maybe giving like an output descriptor to a lawyer but other people very much not but of course people should just listen should be aware that it's a privacy consequence to that so obviously you think that's true some people they're not comfortable with that and they would rather you know keep that away from the lawyer or away from those other locations and maybe that output descriptor is only backed up in a location that your family can see it something like that but you just have to also consider the trade-off of redundancy right the more copies of that out there the more redundancy and the easier it is for somebody to help recover in the case of that output descriptor information somehow being lost right because it's possible and we'd hate for people to lose access to the coins right so those is probably a few important points also I guess there's some of the more advanced stuff that's coming right so I didn't upset recently about mini script there's been some discussion about music to DC applications for any of this stuff or is it maybe a bit early it is definitely a bit early but we are keeping close look at it and we are very excited with mini script and music to fast and stuff it is definitely early because as you would appreciate there are there are situations not situation there are still cases in terms of any using a music to or of such you have interactivity involved there which is not really the best thing when it comes to security you don't want to really either bring the keys together or go to them multiple times right neither do you want to make them interact with each other so there's some uncertain problems in that space but you know a lot of amazing people are walking towards it so that will probably get some awesome data and the mini script has been you know actually mini script has been around for a while now right and people often ask us so why not mini script yet why not mini script yet we have looked at mini script we have played at mini script but the practical aspect of it is different is that mini script essentially generates a safe bitcoins right mini script is good is standard a safe bitcoins script however other than multi-sick the safe bitcoins chipset generates with multiple spending conditions and multiple ranchers and all that is really it doesn't really have that much of an important when it's a simple multi-sick that can be done without with a simple script but when it comes to multiple spending policies that is when really like a 2 of 3 plus 1 of 2 plus time lock or you know some kind of a combination that is when mini script really comes to the 4 now told that right now but really there are 3 problems to it because taproot is still not you know taproot or mu c is still not there out there so so you wouldn't really be able to benefit that much for mini script right now as you would once these things are in place so the script can be used but it is not effective without these other factors right so once these factors are there and then there there is less interactivity and the hardware wallets are you know able to showcase those policies on the small screen these are unsolved problems yet that is when mini script will really be used so we are looking forward to those kind of developments in the ecosystem to be able to use these advanced features yeah and he thoughts on time locks as well because this is something where you know people love to I guess it's one of those areas where people love to philosophize and talk about you know this and that and now Bitcoin does have time locking like on-chain time locking but I think practical uses of that outside of let's say the smart contracting stuff like lightning which is a different you know kettle of fish here but in terms of multi-sick and stuff like that these are you saying much interest in this or much practical use yeah absolutely there are lot of people interested in time lock there have been people okay are you willing to do time lock are you going to do time lock is absolutely time lock is something which we have done internally but the time lock and you know we spoke about the registration and how you verify the details and all that that particular piece is still not therefore time locks so you can implement time locks but you would you may not have a particular sending device supporting it now leisure is working towards it and we are working with leisure to see how we can implement it but essentially at this point in time there is no real hardware support for time locks right so you might have I think again from the podcast and otherwise we know that I think Lyam is trying to use time locks but there is no sign device support for it and even if there is a sign in device support it will be without registration so you're losing out onto some security to have some security what we're trying to get to work with the minister to get to a situation where you don't have to lose security too much to gain time lock as a feature yeah totally fair I mean the security but I mean the whole reason why we're using multi-sick to begin with is the security benefits so obviously we're not going to you know throw that out the window so yeah I think that's important so I guess a couple tips maybe we should leave listeners with just make sure when you're doing your multi-sick you keep it simple right like don't do something crazy don't don't sort of stay in the world-traught and pathways I think there are good reasons to use the typical like two or three or three or five I think for most people unless you have a specific use case I think for most people two or three or three or three or five is probably going to be a good forum for people making sure you keep those backups as we mentioned the backup of the output descriptor or the BSMS I think those are important points to remember but yeah I guess do you have any other kind of tips on multi-sick before we finish that I think it's just a quick TLDR and what we discussed like okay there are these three you know these two good configurations available and a lot of software voltage like keeper offer that so stick to that stick to that take backups test it out like reset test it out on multiple hardware devices any devices and also test it out probably multiple coordinating software like Sparrow and Keeper and Spectra wallet and when you do that you will be so comfortable because you're seeing three different things telling exactly the same same balance in the same output so it will like yeah you know what I kind of trust this situation of the system that I've been so if you do these things these few things then you want to see this not that yeah so I think I think it's worthwhile for a lot of people now certainly not for the beginners but I think for people who are let's say you're a long time bit cleaner and you know your stack is worth a reasonable amount it's worth your while right like I think people lose perspective sometimes right because they might be like someone who you know maybe bought some coins a few years ago or whatever and the prices run up and now they've got like you know over a million dollars worth of coin or let's say over 25 coins in like a single signature hardware wallet or hardware signing device or hardware signer and you know maybe it's time for you to think hey if you if you're holding you know over 20 or 25 coins worth what's like a few hardware devices and some metal seeds that's nothing for you right like so it's it's important to think about the perspective yeah sorry I'm just on that point we did some you know back of then look at the issue but like I said a typical multi-sick today cost 500 right and let's say even if you have bitcoins worth $5,000 which is probably you know a quarter of a bit coin a point to bit coin depending on the price that will mean you know something around 5 to 10% of the security cost now in in bitcoin you know that it can 10x very easily and if it does 10x then it will become like 1% of your 1% of your cost having a security cost of 1% to secure the whole amount is a decent security cost right so if you think about it in those terms and have you know put in some hours of effort actually like you know you have orders of magnitude better security and the cost is not really I it is 1% of the problem on potential so that's that's probably one way to think of all it yeah yeah okay so I think that's the multi-sick aspect let's talk a little bit about bitcoin for India so I unfortunately could make it last year because of clashes and stuff but I'm looking forward to being there off the top my head is October 14th of 15th I think yeah do you want to just give us an update on bitcoin for India? Absolutely so this is this is the community piece that some of us are involved in with other volunteers but more than happy to you know put it on this platform as well that you know stiffened a little bit person there and there will be many other bitcoiners would be there would be you know talking to blacks in India and talking multi-sick talking pastries talking a lot of stuff you know how to do how to do probably running a node so it will be a mix conference like it was the standard technical track and that would be a main track but we are we are very excited about it and we are obviously going to look for more participation this time from speakers and from audience so this is an October 14th of 10th of the data as a song. Fantastic and in Bangalore right and so I'm also you know it's been one year now like bitcoin it will it will have been you've already had the first conference you've been growing this meetup network let's say of more committed bitcoiners and so hopefully there'll be a you know a growth in the community by then and who knows maybe there'll be a lot of people joining the community between now and then so maybe they'll all be there as well so looking forward to that and yeah any any other points you wanted to mention before we finish up. No I think I think by the time this probably the the pod goes out the keeper app would be available on mainnet till night was on testnet it is still beta but it is available in the mainnet so it's very easy for people to test out so do give it a run try it out with small amounts of amounts of sats and give us some feedback it is an awesome product and we hope you love it. Fantastic okay Anna thanks for joining me. Thanks everyone thanks for having me cheers. I hope you found that discussion helpful and make sure to share this episode with any family or friends who are curious about setting up multi signature and bitcoin security it's been a while since we've really walked through some of the details of this of course I have those earlier episodes with a range of people talking about these things I will include those in the show notes also but I think this one is a good overview episode for people who want to understand where things are at today with multi signature so share the episode and the show notes are available at StefanLevera.com slash four five five thanks for listening and I'll see you in the Citadel's.
