---
title: SLP450 Bitcoin Developer Education Overview with Josibake
transcript_by: youtube_to_bitcoin_transcript_v_1.0.0
tags: ['']
categories: ['']
speakers: ['']
media: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WBhDxtxtSI
---

 Josie, welcome to the show. Thanks for having me. So Josie, I know you were keen to chat about, I know you've been doing a bit of work in the Bitcoin development world, doing some mentoring as well, and keen to chat a bit about the process of Bitcoin development, education, why is it important? All of that. But let's first start with a little bit about you. Can you tell us a little bit of your journey getting into Bitcoin core development? Yeah, so my background, and mostly why I'm so passionate about this topic. So I've been working in tech for about eight years before I got into Bitcoin, kind of on the data science and data engineering side of things. A couple years ago, I was getting more interested in Bitcoin from the technical side, and then just came to a place where it was like, all right, the job I was at wasn't super interesting at the time. I was becoming increasingly obsessed with Bitcoin, and I took the chain code Bitcoin development seminar, and then was like, all right, let's just try this. Let's go full-time Bitcoin for a while. So I jumped in kind of without a parachute, just started working and contributing to core directly, and then that turned into learning about the grant process and then getting funding. So I've been working for almost two years now with, well, one complete year funded by Coinbase in the first year, and then most recently with a grant from Gemini. So that's kind of where my interest in this topic comes from is, I didn't know anything about getting into Bitcoin core development when I started, and these resources were super helpful for me, so I want to make sure that everybody else knows that these are out here and how to use them. Would you say the developer onboarding has improved over the years? I would say so, yeah. Especially, and I think it comes in waves where there's a really concerted effort from a lot of people, and then maybe there's a law, or there's not a lot of people coming in, then there's a new wave of people coming and asking questions about how to get involved in Bitcoin, then it causes people to look at that stuff again. I think in the last couple years, you've seen this be more of a concerted focus, especially with things like El Salvador and other countries getting interested in Bitcoin. There's that element of like, okay, and how do we also take the local developer talent and get them involved with contributing to Bitcoin and the larger Bitcoin ecosystem? In some examples of that, so when I first heard about this, there was the Chinko seminar, but since that you've now had Torigos.dev, which is an El Salvador focused one, there's a few others. I think there's now a Brazilian focused developer education. And a Vintium, yeah. Yeah, yeah. So you've seen these things kind of pop up all over the place, which indicates to me that it is getting better, or at least getting more attention. And I recall at one point, it was difficult to get funding. And I think nowadays it's more that there is funding, but it's more, they're looking for the right level of talent, the right level of ability, aptitude, let's say, motivation. But I guess we are in a bit of a bare cycle right now, so maybe that can wax and wane just like Bitcoin's bull and bare cycles, doesn't it? Yeah, I think that's the somewhat unfortunate part. When you're in the bull market, everybody's got extra cash laying around and some of them start just throwing it at like, I will just develop a funding. That was kind of my experience in the past where I joined a grant program and then midway through the grant program, they were like, okay, we're not renewing anybody next year because the market's going down and this is no longer a focus for that. For us, I think one thing that makes me positive about the future in this is, it does feel like there are more long-term partners coming in and saying, hey, we're here to fund developers for the long run, and we're going to be a little bit more careful so that we can sustain supporting those developers through bare and bull markets instead of being like, oh, it's a bull market, we're going to fund everybody and then we go into a bare market and they're like, okay, well, nobody's getting money once your grants run out. So that commitment to a more sustainable long-term thing is encouraging to me. I think also, like you mentioned, there's more focused funding groups, like I think, Ventium, so what you said earlier, they're kind of carving out a niche. They're saying, okay, we're not going to raise money and fund all developers, but we are going to support Brazilian developers and that's an area that we can kind of focus on. Toragas, I think, was another example. So the more that people kind of specialize in a niche as well, I think that helps make the process more sustainable. Yeah, and it's fair to say there are a lot more organizations now doing this. Whereas, rewind the clock five, six, seven years, it might have been at that stage, Blockstream and maybe MIT, DCI and maybe a few individual things. But now we have this chain code, we have Brink, we have HRF does some funding of developers as well. So I think there's more organizations doing that, but I guess if we were to just think about the concept of just Bitcoin, developer education, why is that important? Yeah, I think it's important for a couple reasons. Well, the first reason as a developer, I want to see more developers coming in and working in the ecosystem. And when I say the ecosystem, that can be Bitcoin core, that can be alternative implementations, that can be lightning, that can be wallet. There's so many open source projects in the space that need a pool of developers. And I think why developer education is so important to me is there's quite a long funnel there. You don't just wake up one day and say, I'm technical, I know how to program, I'm going to just switch over to Bitcoin core or whatever in the Bitcoin ecosystem and start making meaningful contributions. There's quite a steep learning curve. And at least for myself, what I felt like I was up against was I wanted to get involved, and I knew that I wanted to be a long-term contributor, but I didn't even really expect to see myself making meaningful contributions until year two and three. The first year is kind of just getting your bearings, figuring out how things work, helping ease the workload of others. And then maybe in that second year, you start to take more ownership over projects, take on bigger things. And then in that third year, I would consider myself like a full swing developer. So because it's such a long funnel, you've got to keep people in that pipeline because people are going to start, they're going to fall out because of life circumstances changing or losing interest. So it's important to have, I think, constantly have that funnel filled so that there are new developers coming into the ecosystem. I think it's also quite important to me. Yeah, gone? Yeah, not, not, like even if your goal isn't, I want to be a Bitcoin core contributor, or I want to build a Bitcoin wallet. Just going through the technicals of Bitcoin is super important, even if you're going to work in a totally different industry. But you want to somehow interface with Bitcoin, having that technical knowledge of how it works. And even as users of the system, I think it's important for everybody to be enhancing their technical knowledge, because the more we understand how Bitcoin works, the better users of the system we are, and the more active we are going to be in interacting with the network. Bitcoin is a very, it requires active engagement from the users of the system. One other challenge with Bitcoin is that there is no top down boss. There's no CEO of Bitcoin. So does that present any special challenges for a person trying to do this Bitcoin development thing? Yeah, absolutely. Oftentimes we solve these inefficiencies through taking a very authoritarian or top down approach. And we've even seen this in other open source projects, where open source projects will adopt a benevolent dictator for life approach. I'll just be like, okay, we have one very strong leader of the open source project, and what that person says goes, they kind of define the direction for the project and resolve conflict. And that tends to work really well. Of course, that doesn't, that's not going to be tenable for Bitcoin. So I think that can make things very slow sometimes. And I think it requires more work on the people trying to onboard and learn. Because sometimes you just want to be like, they just tell me what to do. Like, tell me what to read, tell me what to work on. And then you say that I'm Bitcoin, everyone's like, wow, no, you have to figure that out for yourself. You have to decide what's important. And you have to learn how to advocate and build consensus around your ideas as well. When you have a project manager or someone kind of leading the direction of the project, you just come in and you say, all right, what's on the roadmap? Okay, I'd like to work on that. You come into something like Bitcoin, and it's like, well, where's the roadmap? Where's the list of priorities that we have right now? And though we do have some elements of those, it really is more like, well, what do you think is important? What do you want to contribute? What do you think will be meaningful? And can you get other people to agree with you and work on something like that? I think it also can present challenges in even how do we decide to onboard people? Who decides what the authoritative curriculum is? And that's very much up in the air as well, and something that we don't want, like, there to be this opinionated way to develop on Bitcoin. So, I think there's good reasons why it is that way, but if you're looking for a more traditional education experience, then that's going to be challenging. Right. And to be fair, it might vary depending on what area of the ecosystem you want to work on. Obviously, some of the stuff you're mentioning is most relevant with Bitcoin, core, and Bitcoin protocol level work. But if you're just working in some Bitcoin company, and you're just helping as part of their wallet and their node, and that part might be a little bit more having a typical structure. Right. You're working, you know, there might be an engineering manager or a CTO, and that kind of top-down leadership, at least in that context. Maybe that exists there, and that they might have their own pathway that they send you through, and maybe, you know, that's what it is. So, maybe you could just comment a little bit on the, you mentioned the curriculum idea as well. So, does something kind of like that exist today? Is it chain codes curriculum? Is it somebody else? Is it reading, you know, mastering Bitcoin by Andrea? So, a croaking Bitcoin by a color-ocean balm? Like, what would you say is some of the key things that you need to learn or go through to be a Bitcoin developer? Yeah, I mean, so far, the mastering Bitcoin continues to be the gold standard. I think anyone who's ever tried to do anything in a technical sense on Bitcoin is at least encountered that book. I think, you know, the one I like to highlight is the Bitcoin protocol development seminar by chain code. That was my first exposure to the Bitcoin, like programming on the Bitcoin protocol. So, I had read mastering Bitcoin, then went through the chain code seminar. And I think that the chain code seminar is really good in that from the beginning, they open sourced all of that material and open sourced the model that they were using to run those with the hope that it's not that everyone should go through the chain code seminar before they want to work on Bitcoin, and that's something they wanted to avoid. Instead, it's here's a list of great resources that we've curated. We've put it into a semi-structured six-week program. You can join ours, or you can pick this up and run with it on your own. And that's been exciting to see where people have used the chain code seminars kind of a launching point for their own programs. It's something like I also did myself after I had gone through the chain code seminar, got together a bunch of friends who were technical and like asking me a lot of questions about Bitcoin and kind of interested in getting involved. They're just learning more. And instead of answering the same question five different times with five different people, I was like, why don't you guys, I'll just get together, go through this chain code material, we'll follow loosely the format where we'll meet once a week and we'll discuss. And I think like from that one or two of them actually have stuck around and either moved into working from working for Bitcoin companies or contributing. So that is to me kind of the gold standard of, here's this great curriculum you can start with. You can tailor it to your needs. It's not really gate kept by chain code. They actively encourage people to pick it up and use it. And that kind of, the quality is good and it also kind of gets around that risk of like, okay, well everyone has to go through chain code if you want to work on Bitcoin. Right. And I understand that was at sometimes there have been people who've made a criticism saying, oh, it seems like to do anything in this area you must have gone through this area, you must have been mentored by somebody and otherwise you haven't come, you haven't come through the right gate keepers and so you won't be accepted let's say, your changes will just not be ever reviewed and promoted and pushed forward and you know you'll just be relegated off into some irrelevant area. I guess that was one of the criticisms. Would you say that's still true or not not a fair criticism? It's something I've never experienced certainly both I've never been criticized for not coming through a proper channel and I've also in working with other people never heard or gotten the hint of that. Certainly if that's been someone else's experience I can't be like, no, you didn't experience that, but it's something I've never gotten a whiff of and something that I would probably call out and push against pretty hard. And I also think, you know just by design of making that material available for others. I think Chanko is doing a good job of hedging that criticism a little bit and saying, look, obviously people can still go through our seminar and we've put a lot of work into making it run smoothly, but anybody can run these seminars and it seems like people have been doing that and running those and I would hope that the people coming out of some of these other programs aren't feeling like, oh I didn't get the Chanko approval so nobody's paying attention to the work I do. Yeah, of course and to be clear, I'm not criticizing Chanko. I've looked through some of the material and I've personally benefited. I'm not even a developer myself. Obviously I'm just trying to stay up to date on what's going on and try to learn about things. So definitely it's a good thing to talk about that. You're going to be careful. You want to avoid criticism and the appearance of criticism. You want to avoid evil in the appearance of evil. You want to make sure that you're running the thing in a way that that's why the open sourcing of it is so important. They're not kind of holding it and saying it's our program because if there were another group that come out and be like, we've created this amazing Bitcoin education content and we'll help you be a developer. But you have to go through our program to do it. That to me would be a red flag. I'd be like, wow, why can't you just show us the material you're using and if we want to use your program we can if we want to use it ourselves. So these little distinctions I think are important for stuff like that. Yeah. And I think one other area is this notion that it's one thing to have a training or a seminar but I think it's also important that people see there's a light at the end of the tunnel that there's some kind of paid opportunity and I think that's what makes people have real interest because you might be let's say you're a computer science or developer or some kind of student today and you're looking, okay, what are my career pathways. I think it's important that there's some kind of viable pathway at the end. Yeah, that's super important. It's difficult to have the motivation to take on something as big as learning Bitcoin protocol development. If you don't have some sort of tangible benefit for yourself even if it's just a deeper understanding of it. The flip side of that is that's not something that's very difficult to guarantee. That's a very difficult thing to say like if you go through this program you're going to get a job for sure. And there's also an element of like you certainly want people who are doing it for a reason and the motivation has to come from somewhere but there has to be an element of I'm doing this because I'm internally motivated to do it. Like there has to be an element. I've learning this because I want to because I'm fascinated by it. I want to enrich my understanding. I want to find a way to contribute no matter what because sometimes that light at the end of the tunnel is going to be the end of the end of the end of the end of the end. The tunnel is going to be very unclear. And how are you going to motivate yourself to keep doing this if it's unclear if you're going to get a job in a company or if it's unclear if you're going to get funding. And I try to be really careful when I'm, you know, shilling these things to people and being like you should look into this to not also be like look if you go through this you'll definitely get a job or you'll definitely get a grant. Because then if that becomes your motivation and you're like all right cool I'm going to do this I'm going to get a grant and I'm going to get a job. You go through it and that doesn't materialize and there can be just frustration and anger and be like well you know I went through the program. Whereas if we set healthy expectations and be like look this is there are job opportunities out there there's a real need for these things lightning developers, bitcoin developers, contributors. And there are people willing to fund and grant. You are going to have to put in some work here and we can't guarantee something at the other end of it. And so I think I'm curious to hear from you if there are any bottlenecks that you see today like what kind of bottlenecks do you see in terms of that pathway for a person to go from not knowing you know Bitcoin development to being a meaningful contributor or working in some kind of bitcoin role. Yeah I think you know two really big bottlenecks I see one is people running these seminars. You know there is an organization component. Someone has to curate a list of participants someone has to go through applications and be like all right we've got all these people that are expressed interest. Someone needs to run the logistics. I've like let's all meet on jitsie or you know Google meets once a week and here's I'm going to pair you up in groups and whatever. So chain codes been doing that with our seminars and now we have a few of these others that we mentioned. But I think that's the first bottleneck is that this is designed where you could have many many different seminars using the same course material running all over the world. And I think that's one of the things that we have to do with the other side of the bottlenecks. And I think that's the one that I think the other side of the bottlenecks is who are the companies that are hiring, who are the projects that need contributors. So now we've got a bunch of people in at the top of the funnel where do we send them at the end of the funnel and can we meet those expectations. And I think is always going to be a problem is just mentorship. Like how do we have people that are kind of engaging with people who are learning and growing do we have a chance for them to meet one on one. Do you have a chance for people to kind of get shared their experience of what's worked well for them and the project to not. And there have been I know this happens in core and a few other projects that have been people who will volunteer to mentor. And so when it comes to onboarding to Bitcoin core, I know there was an interesting website and resource it's obc.256k1.dev. And it's got a full on it's quite a in depth resource like going really into like what is the process. Could you tell us a little bit about this site. Yeah, so this is the onboarding to Bitcoin core document. This has been well Clark has been putting a ton of work into this over the past year I think in conjunction with Adam Jonas and a few other people from the code but the idea is when you go into the Bitcoin protocol development seminar, you're just kind of learning a high level overview of Bitcoin the protocol and how things work. So that's great. You know how everything fits together but you're a developer and you're ready to start contributing to Bitcoin core, where do you go next. And some people had identified that there was a gap there of like there really doesn't exist this high level overview of the code base of Bitcoin core. The sections in the code, how does it different modules fit together. And so that's what is being tackled in this document where it's like okay, it's expected that you kind of understand how Bitcoin the protocol works. Now do you understand how Bitcoin core the code base works. And it's organized as kind of that like high level to where it won't need to be updated super often as the code changes but it's still specific enough to be helpful. So it gets into like certain classes and core organization. So this is a relatively new resource. We're planning to use this in the current COLA cohort that I'm helping mentor. I imagine it'll start being incorporated into a lot of other developer education programs. And I think it serves a really like it meets a need that is existed for a while of like what's the high level view of how all these moving parts work together because like even just Bitcoin core the code base is quite complex. And as you rightly, I guess, alluded to there are multiple implementations of Bitcoin as well. So yeah, yeah, the Bitcoin and BTCD and Bitcoin. And this I think the way this is written it is very much tied to how Bitcoin core is organized but it's also written in such a way that some of the stuff that it's talking about it would be valid. If you were looking at Levit coin or something else like that. And that's an interesting point too because the Bitcoin protocol development is not specific to Bitcoin core. What you're learning in the Bitcoin protocol development seminar is more just Bitcoin, the network, mining versus peer to peer. This is a handbook to Bitcoin core, the client. But with kind of points of what is consensus and validation and why do we keep that code separate from this over here. So I think it would still have use as if you're interested in looking at another implementation. Yeah, and now you mentioned call as well. So we should chat about that. Also, listen as I have an episode with Abu Bakr as well. But Josie, give us your take what's call and what's your involvement in it. Yeah, call is awesome. I saw the first cohort happen last year and was really excited about the effort. And so because I've been involved with the Bitcoin, the BPD seminars, ever since taking them, I usually try to pop back in as a mentor. A few people reached out and asked if I'd be interested in helping mentor this next cohort in call. And so as mentors and instructors, we're more just there to guide the students and help them. Because I think call them much like the the chain code seminars, it's very much a peer to peer learning style. Where we're not setting up a classroom environment where we teach and they listen and there's this one way flow of information. And it's very much here's all of this material that we need you guys to go through. A lot of it's drawn from the BPD seminar on boarding to Bitcoin core will be used as well. Other resources read this together, discuss it, and then we're going to apply it to project. So as a mentor, we're more there to just kind of shepherd that interaction. Ask questions, you know, ask questions to kind of push the students to dig more, answer questions when people are stuck and help unblock them as they go through technical projects. And I guess perhaps I should have mentioned for the benefit of the listeners, what call is it's a boot camp that's focused on African developers and they're already technical. And that can mean either university or working in a software engineering position. And this is how do we take you from being a software engineer to a software engineer who understands and can work on Bitcoin. So it's very hands on very project based. And the goal of call is at the end of it, we have them interviewing with Bitcoin companies or contributing to open source projects. There is that very like tangible. We want you guys to do this as a transition into a Bitcoin career. I think the first cohort was full time. And then one of the learnings there was like that's quite an aggressive ask to ask people to quit their jobs and do this, especially as the markets uncertain, you know, not only in Bitcoin, but in the wider tech industry. So this new core that I'm a part of is part time. Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. And so any other resources, I know there's another one called Bitcoin dev philosophy. So this is an e-book I've seen. Can you tell us a little bit about this one and what's going on here? Yeah, I think this is kind of the third. So you know, BPD seminar, which is an overview of Bitcoin, the network and the protocol and how it works. And you have onboarding to Bitcoin core, which is how the reference client works, how Bitcoin core works. Then you have this Bitcoin philosophy, which is kind of the as people who build things in the Bitcoin ecosystem, whether that be full nodes or wallets or whatever. What kind of principles guide our decision making. And there's this is something that's really interesting as you start to interface with devs from all over the world and working on Bitcoin. And we all might have, and we should have a very diverse set of personal views, both on the use of Bitcoin and, you know, how we want to use it and how the world should use it. But then there should be some things we can all agree on as developers and kind of have consensus around. So when we come to building on Bitcoin and working on Bitcoin, what are the things to keep in mind. And those are kind of laid out in the Bitcoin philosophy document. So they cover things like decentralization. What is that so important and trustlessness? What do we make these tradeoffs in Bitcoin? And that guides development decisions. Because oftentimes you can, as a software engineer, you can go towards a more centralized or trusted model, end up with something that's far more efficient. There are reasons why we build trusted centralized systems. So as a software engineer, when you're facing with like, okay, this is really hard, why are we doing it this way, we could just do it this other way. That document kind of serves as a good starting place for everyone to be like, no, no, this is actually super important that we do it the hard way. Because of these principles in Bitcoin. So that document covers some things like decentralization, privacy, and other topics to kind of be like, these are things that, as engineers, we should all kind of have some agreement on. And build these principles into the software and the projects that we do. So it can be understood like these are broadly understood. These are some of the goals of the projects in a way. And that if you do something that cuts against those, then that change may not really get approved. The other users and Bitcoin is may not really go with that change. And so therefore there's not really much point trying to do something that's going to cut against some of these things. Some of these high level ideas. And of course, there'll be debate exactly, you know, the nuances of what, how much of this versus that should we have. And I guess that's where the online discussion can go, whether it's IRC or online, social media and so on. So also, could you outline just for listeners who may be if they're new to Bitcoin development, where does most of the discussion take place? Yeah, so the, the, at least in Bitcoin core, a lot of the discussion is happening in the Bitcoin core, Deb IRC channel. And that some people are kind of like, why I see it's a very low bar and it's, it's easy for people to participate from anywhere without compromising privacy and other things like that. And, and IRC is one of the more decentralized chat solutions out there. So it's kind of this nice middle ground. So a lot of we have the weekly IRC meeting, which discusses things just particular to Bitcoin core. There are other channels on IRC that people will start for development stuff. There's like a Bitcoin builds channel and there's a used to be a wallet channel. I'm not sure if that's still maintained. So IRC is kind of the first place you go to. There's also other groups, there's the Bitcoin design channel on Slack, if you're, if you're less on like the, the hard core coding and more just on the design side. So that's where a lot of people kind of gather and work there as well. For also new people coming in who are interested in getting involved, there's the Bitcoin core PR review club, which also happens on IRC. And that is a great way to get your feet wet. It's a very new friendly place where we meet once a week and someone has volunteered to go through a PR. So the pick up the are that's open in Bitcoin, they'll curate some questions to kind of encourage thought amongst the members. Everyone will review before the IRC meeting and then they just get together and chat and discuss it and it's a place to kind of attract new people and get them involved with Bitcoin development. So those are kind of the main areas to get started. When I first got interested in Bitcoin development, I just joined the Bitcoin core development channel and just lurked for like three months, just listened and kind of got a sense for the communication style and what kind of things were discussed there. And then there's also GitHub commentary and now this is more specific to Bitcoin core, let's say, although I mean that GitHub is used for other projects too. But we'll see people discuss there in GitHub commentary about various pull requests or issues. And then there's also the mailing list as well. So if you could offer a bit of a comment there on any involvement you have there and what to expect there. Yeah, so GitHub's a great place for technical just history. A lot of really good discussions that have happened on PRs and in issues. We back up all of that metadata from GitHub so in the event we ever had to move, we could take it there with us because there is such a rich history there. Oftentimes when you're thinking of something that you want to do or an idea you've had one of the best places to go is go look at PRs that have been merged or closed and look at GitHub issues and you'll often find discussions going all the way back to 2014 or older. With the really well thought out arguments between different developers on these things. So that's an amazing resource. You also mentioned the mailing list which is great for more long form posts. So you have an idea or something and you want to get wider feedback from the Bitcoin ecosystem and you know with Bitcoin mailing list you're not even really limiting yourself to just Bitcoin core. So you're going to get feedback from everybody involved in developing on Bitcoin and then that way you can kind of craft a much longer form more thoughtful post and then people can respond in longer form which is really great. So oftentimes you'll see people kind of like submit something to the mailing list for this really big feedback session which then gets distilled down into opening a PR or an issue or something a little bit more specific. You mentioned one more. I think that was it. I think this GitHub issues pull requests and mailing list but yeah there's Bitcoin dev mailing list. There is a lightning dev mailing list as well obviously more focused for the lightning developers out there. And then yeah I guess if we can tell a little bit about your experience as well like nowadays with contributing in Bitcoin core what kinds of things are you focusing on? Yeah from myself. So I spent a lot of time last year working in Bitcoin core. I split that time about half actually working in the repository so reviewing PRs and adding contributions myself. So I got from another developer was scratch your own itch find a part of Bitcoin that you use or that you you actively use because then you're going to be the most motivated to work on it. And you're going to have the perspective of a user as a developer so I was like well I use the Bitcoin core wallet and there are some things about it that annoy me so why not start there. Then really started to enjoy it because while it's what they sound pretty simple there's a really complex space there of problems with implications for privacy and efficiency and a lot of everything so I focus there and then in the other half of my time I work on the data side of things. And working on a project around collecting mental data and analyzing that with one of the researchers from chain code. Going into this year I'm spending also my time in the wallet working with Ruben Thompson on the silent payments scheme so helping do review there. And then beyond that I think I want to branch out of the wallet a little bit and maybe get more into the cryptography desktop all my dusty maths. And so for people who aren't familiar there are these different areas of Bitcoin core could you just explain what those are for people who don't know. Yeah, so I mean when we talk about the different areas of Bitcoin core I tend to generally think of this in terms of modules and code organization. But some of the major areas are so the men pool is one kind of discrete area of Bitcoin that can be focused on from the men pool then you have peer to peer. And there's lots of different you know sub specializations with impure to peer but peer to peers one of those broad categories. You have the wallet which is kind of self explanatory module of Bitcoin core then you have consensus and validation, which is a part that nobody wants to touch or at least touch very carefully. So I would also put the build system as its own module so how we how we build Bitcoin core we manage the dependencies how we make things reproducible, etc that's kind of its own unique area as well. There's there's been some discussion about even breaking out more granular sections like low level net processing has been something being discussed recently and I'm probably missing others. So testing is kind of considered its own modules of the unit test framework and the functional test framework. We have people that kind of just regularly regularly contribute to that area. Gotcha. And so also if you could explain for people who are doing Bitcoin development how to like personally basically if you could explain a little bit about test net, reg test and signet if you could just explain what those are why do we use those. Yeah, they're so starting with reg test that's their very I would almost call it like a dev environment like a local dev environment. You can spin up a little chain and you can run nodes but it's all local your computer everything's network to your computer so. Reg test is what we use for running the functional test framework will actually spin up a node and then we have these Python wrappers around it that can manage the interactions between these nodes simulate different experiences but it's all local to your computer. Test nets kind of one step more complicated than that where you can join a network that you're interacting with other nodes and I believe there is a mining component to test net. You can also get test Bitcoin and so you can start to run through different workflows all with fake Bitcoin so like I want to test a multi six set up. So I'm going to spend up a note on test net I'm going to get some test net Bitcoin and I'm going to send a transaction make sure that I can spend it, etc. So it's like a playground and then from test net you have like a much more formal and cleaned up version which is signet and signet actually has like a regular mining function so you can have blocks get mined. You can interact with other nodes there's been some discussion recently about like having multiple segments so I think AJ's been running something Bitcoin in position which I haven't dug too much into but that's an idea of like if something's a potential software for Bitcoin we can throw it all into this test net and kind of see how stuff interacts. So this is super important for developers right like you're working on something you want to see how it works on the wild so you got to run it on test net or our signet. But it's also amazing resource for people who just use Bitcoin you can actually run a node do stuff with sending receiving transactions complicated wallet backups recoveries and you can do it all on something like signet or test net where it's behaving the same way it would on main net but you can give yourself that confidence. So you can know what you're doing before you actually run something on main net so good for developers but also good for users. There's also this concept of a good first issue and an issue tracker so can you just explain a bit about that. Yeah in Bitcoin core there's a label that as we run into stuff or if someone has an idea you can put an issue and you can put the label on it this is a good first issue and that's a way to draw in and encourage new developers. To get involved because when you start contributing to any open source project there's the subject matter expertise which in our case is Bitcoin and then there's just the general knowing how to work in open source expertise. And oftentimes people have have neither when they first joined so a good first issue I think is a way to give someone an opportunity to go through the process of working in open source with something that doesn't require a ton of Bitcoin knowledge. So you can kind of be you're familiar with how Bitcoin works you're familiar with the fundamentals and here's a task that's pretty easy it's easy to wrap your head around and doesn't require this like deep understanding of the code base or even of like the Bitcoin knowledge and then that allows you to go through that process of like opening a PR getting feedback making sure your commit hygiene is really good writing good descriptive messages. Seeing it through because even like a good first issue can be open for a months or even even a year I think for myself I found a good first issue when I first joined the project and someone had taken a stab at doing it before and it kind of fallen off so I found this issue and it ended up taking a year for it to get merged. But it was like a good exercise for me of learning you know what's the communication style in Bitcoin core what how do you kind of ask for review how do you rebase etc and so you get a lot of feedback that doesn't have anything to do with Bitcoin even on those good first issues. So it's always difficult to keep that pipeline primed but as we as developers as we work on Bitcoin we're trying to keep an eye out for like okay here's a nice easy thing that I could probably fix really quickly. But if instead if it's not critical can I make it a good first issue and can I put it there for somebody else who it wouldn't take me that long to fix it but it could also be a really great teaching tool for someone else. I see and I think it'll also be interesting to chat a little I know John attack has also been quite vocal about this idea and I think generally people talk about this idea that it's like there's a bottleneck in terms of how many people are doing review because people want to do a new contribution but actually what people need or what the project needs is experienced reviewers and review time on other people's full requests. Yeah I mean it's a great thing to call attention to. Oftentimes I mean this is true myself and I'm sure there's other developers that feel the same. It can feel not as rewarding to do something like review so our inclination is to write new code. I want to write a test or I want to write a new feature I want to fix a bug and that's more satisfying and it's satisfying to see code that you've written get merged into the code base. That's where we really need people with expertise scrutinizing the code that other people have written to make sure that we're doing things in the best way and we're not introducing bugs or you know codecraft or whatever. And so I think because maybe sometimes we think of review as not as serious of work or it's not as rewarding it can be easy to put off and you think okay I'm going to contribute to Bitcoin core so I'm going to I got to find something to write or fix. When instead really just showing up and doing good through review is the thing that's going to help the project the most. That being said you know like anything we can say okay well. All new people to the project have to do review and if you're your new don't open new PRs that's not also yeah it's also not what we want because if you have this amazing idea like and you have expertise in this area outside of Bitcoin and you can come and make an amazing contribution. We would want that as well, but I think it's it's good to keep in mind at least for myself as well as I work in the day to day I try to balance like okay I'm opening PRs which is really demanding review or asking for review from other people so am I also balancing that by giving review when I'm able to. So open PRs but also look for okay their things that I can help review to help move someone else's project along. One way I've kind of. I've trained myself to think about it as well and I found this to be true in practice is I also benefit a ton from doing good thorough review. When I take someone else's PR and code that they've written and I go through it line by line and I really think about. I think that's a good idea to review even a small PR because it allows me to really dig into what's happening and the benefit there is I'm able to take my own learning and turn it into a deliverable work product to someone else so as I'm learning about this and digging into the code I'm taking notes. Anything I don't understand either about the code base or what the person's doing I'm writing questions and then I can synthesize that into review and be like okay I went through this this was my understanding. I'm you know why you were doing this and I thought maybe you could do it this way and you know etc etc. So that's encouraged me to be a more active review it's I set time aside for myself to learn and then I turn that learning back into something that can be useful for them. That it's always going to be a push and pull in the project I think too because you know doing review can be very exhausting it's it's in some ways it's more taxing I think than just sitting down and like banging out some new code. So balancing your review with thing also you know something a little lighter or something a little bit more rewarding is important. Sure and so can you give listeners just a taste what does it day in the life look like for you as a Bitcoin core developer just so they get an idea what they could look forward to. Yeah the first thing I would say is a day in the life of one Bitcoin core developer is going to be as unique and different from a day in the life of another. And that's a cool feature of the project to me you know we have we have some people that work on Bitcoin core and they go into an office with coworkers we have other people you know coming in from all over the world at various hours. Different working styles and that's something I enjoy working with that really diverse and international group of people. But for me it usually starts with a wake up try to read through the IRC channel to see if there's anything I've missed. You also have a handy little GitHub bot that posts in the IRC channel and PRs are open and closed. So that's kind of a way to see the feed of like what's coming in does anything strike me a super interesting. From there I'll usually add a few things to review to do this like oh that looks really cool or that's a part of the code base that you know I have an opinion about so I kind of want to see what's going on here. If I have any open PRs that's the next thing I'll look at is has anyone given me feedback because there anything to address other do I need to rebase or whatever do I have any outstanding to do's on this. And then and you know after spending some time in core then it's okay are there any other projects that I'm working on right now outside of core and and devoting time to that. The interesting thing I found is there's a lot of benefits to having a boss and there's a lot of benefits to going into work and having someone tell you what to do. So oftentimes the struggle I find as as a contributor is waking up in the morning and motivating myself to do something finding something to do that is valuable convincing myself that it is valuable work. Because as independent contributors there's not really anybody telling us you know this is what you this is what you should be working on this is your highest priority don't work on that other stuff work on this instead so managing your motivation. And even you know your own sprint if you will if like what do I want to accomplish. And sometimes dealing with the doubt of like I maybe I'm the only one that's interested in this. So I think another thing that I try to focus on is interacting with other people as as much as I can and that can be interactions on IRC that can be just asking another developer that you know hey can we hop on a zoom call real quick and chat through something. Or also attending technical conferences so that you do feel like you're a little bit more connected. And you can get the pulse of the ecosystem of like what what are the big rocks that people are moving. Yeah I see and so I'm also curious if you have any views on what do you want to see come to Bitcoin like are you looking for let's say more privacy or you're looking for you know more scale ability like are there any high level ideas that you're looking for. And I think part of this is what drew me to the wallet privacy is is really big for me that that's a huge area it's a huge topic. And I think it's of utmost importance in Bitcoin so as I'm deciding on stuff to work on or think about usually the privacy aspect is what attracts me to something. So there's a number of things in the wallet you know we're working with privacy I think cross input signature aggregation is something I want to look at later in the year because that could be a really big win for privacy in Bitcoin. Because it's a way where we can almost make privacy that the cheapest most effective option when those things are oftentimes at odds with each other. So those are things I'm excited about peer to peer V2 is another it's not really it is privacy there's a lot of other things involved with it but that's something I'm excited about. And would be a pretty big upgrade to Bitcoin but the privacy that the wallet stuff is also super interesting for me not just from the privacy but we can do a lot more just with regular old Bitcoin script and Bitcoin transactions we've got many scripts we've got taproot. You've seen a lot of proposals recently around covenants and like James will be on recently with Op Vault. So there's all these cool ideas of like outside of just regularly sending and securing our Bitcoin we can build much more robust systems and that's all going to be happening in like wallet development. And so that's something I'd really like to see because I think that's key for adoption and scaling Bitcoin is how can we enable Bitcoin to be more feature rich and more foolproof so that we don't have this very high bar of to safely use Bitcoin and custody Bitcoin you need to have all of this knowledge and all of this complicated setup. So those are the areas where I get really excited of lowering that bar and making Bitcoin easier and safer for people to custody and also improving the privacy of the system. Yeah interesting and I think this is an area where people talk about you see debates even in the community of people saying well why is lightning such a high focus isn't it more about hodling and we should make multi signature easier to use and then you know of course everyone has their own different priorities what they have. But you know for me I would really like to see non custodial or let's say self custodial maybe it's a more precise term self custodial scaling and so I guess the way I'm seeing it I'd love to see something like any pro about you know and now I know that's a soft fork idea but that could massively scale the number of people who could self custodially use Bitcoin because you know where we are today is you know it's tiny right and I've mentioned is a foreign I'm sure you can see that. You know your familiar with these ideas as well right like if the UTXO count is something like 85 million or let's say glass note has estimated the number of on chain entities that you know 30 let's say you know even if we round up let's say 40 million. If the world is 8 billion that's half a percent like that's the max we are half a percent that's the max number of people who have Bitcoin today and you we know many of those I just kind of like some person who has like maybe $50. You know they're not storing like a significant portion and so I think that's maybe where the real you know if we look out over the next five to 10 years what would really move the needle I think that's one example but yeah the privacy aspect as well like. Could it be easier for people to do coin joins or maybe easier for people to do this kind of pay join thing where let's say you and I open a channel and we both contribute inputs into that channel and then we're now we're starting to break. We're starting to cut against the common input ownership heuristics that would be massive for privacy right. Yeah I you know I think oftentimes it's we we put these things in boxes where like okay well I you know I care about how to link so I'm only going to care about on chain custody and what not. But well but I care about scaling so I'm only going to work on lightning over here and and a lot of times these things interplay with each other a lot actually. I'm super excited about lightning I kind of have to like keep myself from getting more involved with lightning because I think it's so cool but I can't you know you can't focus on both you have a limited time. But I think there's a lot of really cool ideas of how we can improve privacy and other features by the interplay between custody and lightning. And so when you're opening channels and closing channels and moving funds through lightning what are the privacy benefits we can gain from that. I think you're also right about like the custody thing of not just scaling the the custody which is in itself already a problem. I mean I think people have talked about this before like not everybody's going to be able to own a UTXO if we do the math and take those numbers out. But even just scaling the like improving not scaling but improving the user experience of custody. Because I when I first got into Bitcoin I was scared to take control of my money because you're like it's the first time in my life I had actually been responsible for my own money like it wasn't the bank it wasn't you know a credit card company or an app or whatever it's like oh shit if I if I screw this up like I lose my money and there's nobody to talk to. And I think the more that we can give users feature rich wallets and tools to help them to have more confidence in their self custody that's going to really improve. I also see you know the the interplay between to scale Bitcoin correctly to scale lightning correctly. Someone's got it own that Bitcoin someone's going to custody that Bitcoin and you know I think a vision of the future where it's only you know major lightning nodes running and managing and users are using a mix of custodial solutions on lightning is not really the future that I would want for Bitcoin so. You know the custody thing and the on chain management is important even in the scaling conversation because we want to make sure that it's the actual participants of the network that are doing this. And I think some listeners might be curious your views in terms of privacy there have obviously been a lot of criticisms of bitcoins lack of privacy and I think you know in the early days it was probably fair to say if you. Were careful about how you acquired your coins careful about how you spent the coins maybe the chains of Ellen's techniques were not as advanced, whereas today there's a sense that. What's your view do you think that will be feasible for many people to do like are they all just going to use coin join and tour and other suit on a mitty techniques or do you see that like it's just a fundamentally difficult problem and we may not make that much progress in terms of on chain privacy. Yeah, I would say first and foremost recognizing privacy in the digital age period is a fundamentally hard problem. And I'm I tend to be skeptical and suspicious of anybody who claims they have a silver bullet for it. Just trying to be private with your digital identity is almost an intractable and intractable problem trying to be private with your Bitcoin is a difficult problem. I don't think however given the difficulty of the problem I don't think that I'm ready to throw in the talent Bitcoin I know there's a lot of criticisms saying like you know the privacy in Bitcoin is terrible. Sometimes it feels like those those those criticisms are presented from a we have a solution all you have to do is this and if Bitcoin just did this everything would be better. And I don't think there are many examples of that in Bitcoin I think a lot of times we're looking at trade off some we're looking at. Okay, we could do this one thing over here but does that hurt some of the other aspects of Bitcoin. So privacy is something that's usually held in tension with a lot of other things which makes it a complicated space. I am excited about some of the things that we've been working on in Bitcoin and ideas to improve privacy. I think there's there's some low hanging fruit and there's some work we can do to make it more private or to stop ways that are just obvious leaks that shouldn't be there. And I also think a big part of privacy is especially that Bitcoin is going to be user education. As much as possible we have to make privacy the default because if it's something where we're requiring the user to do it a specific thing that's outside of their flow. Then privacy becomes very difficult so it's both a user education but also creating the system to be opinionated about privacy. It's you know I think it's always going to be a challenge and every time that we come up with some new killer privacy features someone's going to come up with a way to break it and there's always going to be this cat and mouse game in privacy. I think when I when I look at the best privacy we can have on Bitcoin I'm excited about a lot of the ideas on the interplay between you have your on-chain history and then moving to lightning and then coming back to on-chain is there is there things we can do there that work into the actual user flow that can protect and help the privacy. I think there's a lot of ideas to around these collaborative protocols. I think you mentioned page one earlier but there's I think there's some unexplored territory where when people say like oh privacy is about on Bitcoin and we're just going to give up it's like what. There's a lot of work to do right and there's a lot of room to improve but we got to have people that work on this and study this. So if you had to as you mentioned you mentioned some low hanging fruit so if you had to name you know a few low hanging fruit ideas for Bitcoin privacy what would they be. Yeah for me it's mostly looking right now I feel like the low hanging fruit is just transaction construction. There are some heuristics that we can use to pretty easily identify the change output. One of those being when you have like different script types so I made a change to the Bitcoin core wallet and coin selection that was like okay well if I have a bunch of mixed script types let's only try to spend them together so that I don't end up exposing more information that I need to and the change output so that was kind of one area and as I dug more into coin selection it was like oh there's actually a lot of privacy implications in coin selection. And a lot of things that we could probably do. One example I think in core is we have the branch and brown which tries to make changeless transactions. But in order to make changeless transactions you need to have a certain UTXO pool to pull to pull from. So branch and bound is going to be more able to make a changeless transaction which is very good for privacy. When your UTXO pool has a certain number of UTXOs and a certain size of UTXOs. So to me there's an opportunity of all right well if we want changeless transactions because that's good for privacy. How can we over time make our UTXO pool manage our UTXO pool so that it's conducive to make changeless transactions. Which is you know I don't think anyone's looking at that right now actively but that would be a cool area to kind of research and figure out. Now maybe occasionally if fees are low and it's you know ideal to do so instead of making one change output I can make four change outputs of different size because then that will help the chances of my subsequent transactions to be changeless. So that you know I think there's tons of ideas in that area alone of wallet coin selection and transaction construction of how do we make sure that we're not leaking any information. More than we need and also can we also be proactive and can we take kind of like counter measures in transaction construction to break known heuristics. And that's yeah plenty of runway in that space I think. And so the way you're seeing it then maybe some of those ideas would involve more interactivity. And so perhaps that's maybe where some of the challenges and I've seen people talking about this as well where once you introduce that interactivity. There can also be other risks like maybe there's now a DOS vector or maybe someone can come to you and say oh hey Joycey show me your UTXO set so that I can do a collaborative transaction with you. But actually I was malicious and I was just doing that to kind of figure out what your you know what your coins are right so this kind of it's a I can understand that that being a. It's a complicated area because people want simplicity and they just want to show okay here I'm here I am he's Joycey he's my Bitcoin address you can pay me to that now of course single address is not really a good practice. But there are people doing that and so you know it's sort of there's always this. Interplay there between what's easy and just kind of practical and then what's better for privacy. Yeah and I think requiring more interaction requiring more input from the users almost always means that people are going to do it right we're like human beings we're pretty simple we're going to go for the path of least resistance in the system. And so for me it's also how can we behind the scenes be making proactive decisions for the user how can we make the wall it be opinionated about coin selection. Because you know there's there's one school of thought which is like well let's just give the user tons of options and you know tons of different protocols that they can interact with and some people are going to do that. But the vast majority aren't so how can we make sure that the the the friction to participate in a coin join is so small that it just kind of people just start doing it without even thinking about it because that's the only way we're really going to see that increase. How can we make the wallet be more opinionated about privacy so that the user doesn't even have to worry about it they just sent some Bitcoin and know that their wallet is making privacy decisions. And so the single address is another great example like I'm why I've been focused on on silent payments with Boobin is the easiest thing you can do is just give someone a Bitcoin address and reuse it like be like, I want to send me a Bitcoin just use the one that I sent you last time and we all know that that's terrible for privacy but people are going to do it because it's convenient. And so the more that we can make something just as convenient that also preserves privacy I think is where you win the battle with users. Especially when you start talking about interactivity and protocols then it's not just the privacy but also the complexity of the space that starts to blow up. I think maybe one criticism I could understand from the outside looking in like if somebody is looking at the let's say the Bitcoin developers and the kind of hardcore Bitcoin community they could sort of look out and say, well we're talking about all these things that are kind of all that's someday someday what about the people who need it now right and I think maybe that's where we don't have as good an answer right yes of course I can tell that hey get get a coin join. You know run tool you know do run your own Bitcoin node use coin join. But I guess that's the question of if you're trying to honestly help somebody how much extra work do they have to do to get something that works today as opposed to the quote someday. Yeah this is always the frustration right like we want it to work for everybody today but then we need people to work on it to get it there you know it's where I always start with this is if you want to use Bitcoin in the most private and sovereign way you've got to be comfortable running a node. And like that's kind of the first place to start get comfortable running your own node interacting with it. And for the people who need it today unfortunately I think the best answer we can give them is like you've got a lot of reading to do. Right like you're going to have to know how these tables work you're going to have to learn how to use them effectively and that's quite a big ask of people. And that's unfortunate the more we can chip away at that though the better and also the more people we can get using the complicated difficult to use tools. The more ideas and inspiration we we get from those people to fix them so it's kind of like circling back to the whole developer pipeline like the very first step. Is using the tools and promoting the people use the tools running your node using coin joins and the people who are using those hopefully end up becoming developers to be like hey I was like I mean it's very similar to me using Bitcoin core wallet be like there are things about this I don't like so I can get frustrated. And wait for someone to make a better wallet or you know go wallet shopping to find someone else who's maybe already made one or I can get involved with making the wallet that I want to use. And I think that's the key if people really care about privacy and Bitcoin you've got to use Bitcoin you've got to transact you've got to know what the implications are you got to know what the tools are capable of and not capable of and the best way to do that is to use them. And as you use them don't get cynical like that that's another thing we have to fight against is when you use this stuff and you're like man it could be so much better. It's frustrating there's no way we're ever going to get there instead try to be optimistic about it and be like okay what can we do to improve this what can we do to make this easier. What can I do to make it easier for myself but also what can I do to help other people avoid the same struggle. It's maybe not the most satisfying answer but like it's I think the way we make the system better is we use it more and we take that frustration and we channel it into improvements. And yeah to be clear I'm not overly I don't want to be too critical of Bitcoin overall because I'm saying I'm saying this in the sense that we have to be realistic right and Bitcoin still has this network effect around the world there are all kinds of people who will trade it peer to peer. That's difficult like that kind of name recognition that kind of user base the infrastructure the robustness the number of merchants and exchanges and people and you know traders and you know educators and software and hardware out there for Bitcoin is just incredible and so. I think it's about recognizing that and then looking at okay well what are the okay what are the kind of the you know the one two and three key steps for privacy if somebody wants to be private today. And then you know actually using these tools and then figuring out where to go from there. So I think it's probably a good spot to finish up here Joseph you had the closing comments for people about how and why they should look at getting involved as a Bitcoin developer and the education for Bitcoin developers. Closing thoughts I would say first and foremost start using Bitcoin as much as you can whether you're a developer or not. Running your node interacting with it learning what it's capable of if you are someone with a technical background I'm sure that will lead you to oh this could be better or this kind of sucks and just kind of chase that inspiration use it chase the inspiration. And then take advantage of the resources that are out there and even as a user get more involved with things that are going on use the tools. And when you find that something is uncomfortable or difficult and you don't understand dig into the technical side of it. You know I think all as Bitcoin is whether we're going to contribute to Bitcoin or just use Bitcoin we should be in this continual state of learning and understanding how the system works and the new things in it. And you know as a closing thought that I just always remind myself of and try to remind everybody in kind of a response to the last bit of our discussion it's okay to be super critical of Bitcoin. And as developers and users we should be we should be honest about what what the system can actually do we should be honest about where the limitations are where where things really suck because that's the way that we're going to make it all better. When we get into this idea you know when we get into this mode as users and developers that like okay you know privacy on Bitcoin is fine it's good enough for user experience on Bitcoin is fine you just need to educate yourself. That's that's a dangerous place to be in and it's good to have healthy criticisms both as users and developers. So yeah. Great. Great spot to finish up so yeah so look get involved I will link so listen as I'll put in the show notes all the links so we'll have the chaincode lab seminars there's the onboarding to Bitcoin call there's Carla there's Bitcoin dev philosophy there's all kinds of resources and programs out there there's summer of Bitcoin all of that will be in the show notes. Joe see thank you for joining me today.
